0:20
I've been looking at Majima 140.
It's, I forget the exact name of it, but it's basically it goes through the six elements and it's a it's a discussion about the this is the sutta where the Buddha is going and he asks if he can stay in somebody's woodshed and he says yes.
0:44
There's somebody that's staying there currently though, so he goes in and the Buddha's.
Says oh wow, this.
His conduct is very inspiring.
He talks to him.
He doesn't realize it's the Buddha.
And so he says, all right, let me teach you the dama.
1:01
And there are a number of things that he he goes into, namely the the six elements.
And then he talks about equanimity.
Well, first it's with after the after the consciousness element.
1:17
He goes into the equanimity and kind of goes through that stuff and.
But de Pascal?
And I were discussing the elements the other day.
I'm curious if there's a what what would be a more practical way of approaching that in your experience?
1:45
Well, it would be.
Basically you have to start with what you have.
In other words, you know, like 6 elements.
Well, you're not gonna be contemplating the 5th or the 6th unless you have discerned the first one.
So for somebody at the starting point, the first element is all six elements.
2:08
You know the first Jana is all four Jarnas.
You won't be even correctly being able to think about the 2nd or the 3rd, let alone 4th.
If you have not established yourself in the first, it's inconceivable even theoretically you will not be able to grasp it and same goes for any aspect of contemplation.
2:29
So in case in terms of six elements or casinos and so on, the first one is the direction of all the elements that you can develop.
So what is the first most obvious element that you're paired with?
2:46
Earth.
No, not obvious in that, let's see Earth on Earth, OK, so for me that's an idea, for you maybe it's more practical, but generally what's something that you cannot avoid whether you take it as an idea or not, you are paired with it.
3:01
So the body, the body, it's your basically, it's the direction of the elements of all of them.
So that's how you start to practically contemplate it.
Well, in order to start to practically contemplate it, first you need to contain the body.
3:20
Because for as long as a person is acting out of greed, aversion of delusion, the body that exists for them so to speak, the body that they would see when they look at what the body is, is the body on the level of sense objects.
3:36
Because that's where they're already dependent on and that's already not the body seen accurately enough.
That's not that immediate body you're paired with.
That's kind of the body that's now the result of the essential proliferation and non restraint.
3:53
So if a person contains himself rightly, then that which is left there within that containment approximates the body more accurately that which the body is in your experience.
But fundamentally, in order to then on top of that write containment, in order to discern that which body is in your experience rightly, you have to learn how to attend to it indirectly.
4:29
As we spoke before, any direct attempt to attempt attending to a body, it's gonna be attending to the sense objects, so it's not going to be the body on the level of sense organs.
And so then it's, yeah, learning how to see it peripherally.
4:45
In other words, whatever you're currently attending without shifting your attention too much, you want to discern that this body has to be implied in whatever your mind is currently preoccupied with, has to be there as an underlying basis.
5:05
And if you keep discerning that sufficient amount of times, it will then reveal itself, so to speak.
That which you are discerning as implicit is factually implicit.
That body is factually there as a base of this opinion.
5:21
It's just that you again, you overlook it, you over attend it, or you completely ignore it.
But attending to it indirectly.
In other words, you attend to something else, so to speak.
Whatever takes your attention.
It doesn't matter what you attend.
5:36
Basically what matters is to recognize that whatever you're attending, the source of this experience is a whole of attending to this flow boards now is the existing body as The Sixth Sense space here and now.
That is the that image becomes the implicit base for everything that I'm engaged with.
5:56
And because things are factually so, then that image will settle in, so to speak.
Then you wouldn't have to keep evoking it rightly, it would be seen as.
But no, it can't be otherwise.
Like even if I forget about the body and don't have these images of the body being implicit in this experience as a whole, it is so.
6:18
And that understanding has kind of sunk deeper and sunk through, so to speak.
It's sort of sunk in.
And that's already the contemplation of the element, the element of earth, obviously in this case, then you can take it further.
But even if you don't take it further, this in and of itself is enough.
6:36
Mindfulness of the body or not, forgetfulness of the implicit body to the extent necessary.
It's enough for the final knowledge, as the static Katanasuda says.
And that's exactly it.
See how How do you not forget about something?
6:52
Do you constantly keep it in front of your eyes?
No, you keep it at the back of your mind and that's exactly why Satya Patana of the bodies or any for that matter practice of Satya memory.
So you're not recollecting the body to directly observing it, you're recollecting it as an image of your world dependent upon the body.
7:21
So it's already a form of knowledge like write memory as we said that before.
So just just have a memory of your body being there, regardless of what you're currently engaging with.
Past, present, future, doesn't matter.
7:37
Don't completely forget that your body has to be there and practice it on that level.
See, that's not really that hard thing to do.
What's hard is to contain yourself, to stay on that level, Because the tendency of craving views, of course, and everything else will want to make you overly define it.
7:57
Yeah, but if I tend to it even harder, feel it for what it is, that's how I'll get to that body.
And the more you do it, the further away from the actual body you go.
Because in that case, you're actually overlooking it, yeah, in doing that.
8:13
It's you're over tightening, you're over tightening your focus ring basically.
So it's it's it's going to focus on something past the body.
It will.
It will shift.
And if somebody is recollecting the body.
8:31
In this sense, correctly.
Then.
Why is that?
Why it's progress?
How is that coming to a root?
Fetters.
Why is that so?
Anybody else?
8:51
Because it is exactly through engaging through when engaging in the wholesome conduct or fueling the factors that you overload the bone.
But no, what he's asking is so you're not engaging in the conduct and you're collecting it rightly.
9:10
Why is that resulting in uprooting of the fetters?
Why would that result in in in clearing away of impurities?
But because they're mutually exclusive.
9:29
But why?
Well, like I said, because whenever you're acting out of the fetters, you are necessarily overlooking the body.
And if you're not overlooking the body implies that you are not acting in those ways you can't see the body right falling into.
The circularity Now, now.
9:45
The point is yes, if you don't act out, and if you're rightly mindful, you're uprooting the fetters.
Question Why?
Why is it uprooting the fetters?
What is it that when you are correctly recollecting the body, that environment is unsuitable for the persistence of the fetters, for the growth of the fetters, It's actually killing them off.
10:09
They're fading away for as long as that right environment is maintained internally.
Why is that?
What is the kind of acute aspect of that?
The right order is basically established and maintained.
Yeah.
And So what is the right order mean?
10:27
What is it?
What is impossible to do or even conceive when the right order is established?
Ownership.
Exactly.
So it's impossible dead body that you see indirectly as an implicit phenomenon that endures regardless of present past future.
10:43
Engagement doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter the extent the intensity of engagements, dead body there, if it's seen, it cannot be owned.
It's unknownable is seen as a thing that's that's that's not in your control thoroughly.
And that's why, if you sustain it sufficiently enough, it would like like seep into all the other more acute engaged, activated aspects of your experience that they would then become equally unknownable.
11:09
You'll be dispassionate towards them.
Now with that, what that extent is, well, that can only be measured in hindsight.
That's why you can't have too much of mindfulness.
You can't have too much of the right recollection to dedicate your whole time, every single day of just recall, every single moment of your waking time, to not forgetting the endurance of the body here and now.
11:37
It cannot result in too much.
It cannot result obviously, if you try to over attend to it and overly clarify it, well, that can be too much.
But that means you're already not recollecting it rightly, because that's another question.
What is?
What is memory?
How do you remember things?
You mean?
11:53
Anything, anything, colloquially just in the broadest sense, like what was like, obviously, you know, putting aside the, the, the.
Like what's your name and stuff?
Well, no.
Putting aside the kind of the whole, like, misguided scientific views of our memories, imprint in your brain and whatnot, that's not how it appears for you from your point of view.
12:15
So from your point of view, what is a memory?
How do you recollect things?
It's an image.
It's an image, yeah, but how do you do that?
How do they collect things?
By an attending by.
Attending.
Sure.
By attending.
12:31
Like, exactly by.
By being.
By becoming.
By unabsorbing from whatever you might have been absorbed in.
So you have to kind of step back.
Like, that's already what's known as an act of reflection.
Step back on your situation, even if you don't necessarily think in terms of your situation.
12:50
So it's like, oh, remember something.
And you could even kind of or remember something from yesterday, give me an event from yesterday.
Or can you remember something from approximately 10 years ago when you count the numbers and remember, yeah, that was like 10 years ago.
So you could selectively even remember various other things.
13:08
It's also relational, like like memory not being isolated images, but it looks sort of like a web.
Like different memories.
So the.
So the more.
Related the easier.
It is to.
Recollect, yeah, the things, yeah, they they remind you of other things and so on.
13:25
But are you really doing the remembering?
Is that something that you do?
You as also.
As in like, do you like like just go and find that memory or?
You are a memory.
Sorry.
You are you in a vertical?
13:42
Commerce.
No, no, no.
I mean colloquially I'm not.
I'm not like trying to catch on a jargon.
Now you there, but there is no you and stuff like that.
No, no.
I mean just you.
Do you do you remember it?
How do you remember it?
What is presented?
It's presented.
So presented to what To attach.
14:01
Yeah.
As a person, Yeah.
That's the way of saying it's basically your mind is that which has memories, that that mind you're paired with, They exist for it.
They're in its own domain.
They're not in your domain, so to speak.
So everything is already implicit to a degree like whatever.
14:19
Now it has sort of the significance of being here.
It's it's shaped by the whole fresh memory of coming here, deciding to come here for one reason or the other.
So it's not like that you're always in entirely encapsuled in the present moment without any kind of connection with these things that were before, or things that are implicit as they're gonna be after.
14:44
So that's the whole.
Like past is already in your present implicit, and so is the future.
So past is present, future is present, and present is present.
That's already how things exist.
And from that point of view, you realize images that you have now immediately are already on the level of that faculty of memory, the current images.
15:08
You realize there is no difference.
The only difference is like, oh, is it like here now or like 10 minutes ago.
But from your point of view, where your mind is, there are images represents of.
That's why, again, if that mind gets expanded as the suit is described, gets fully abandoned, sensuality purifies itself from all things, becomes very pliable.
15:27
You will.
You would remember far more than 10 years or 10 lifetimes.
You could remember a lot more because again, it was the mind and images existing in the same sense that I exist with the eye objects.
So the only reason a person might feel like I need to figure out the workings of it is if they put themselves in that relationship as I am doing this and this is relevant for me, But you don't need to figure out the relationship.
15:52
How does the eye see?
How does the nose smell?
How does the mind think?
It's irrelevant?
All you need to do is develop this passion towards it, and that's how you would understand how it works.
But by wanting to figure it out on that specific, overly attending level, you are appropriating it.
16:13
You're making it yours when it isn't, and that's already a form of constricting your mind.
And that constricted mind is not, as is, more forgetful.
Basically, constricted mind will find harder to recollect things rightly or to broaden the context.
16:29
So if you're focusing your breath, you're forgetting the body.
Yeah, yeah, well it's even worse because you you would probably be focusing on your breath for some reason or the other for some implication, and that's already a lack of context due to the wrong view.
Yeah, sure, or sensations and so on.
16:45
But the point is sati means memory.
So write memory, write memory of the body.
Enduring here is a necessary basis for your experience as a whole, right memory of the properties of the body.
17:02
Enduring here is a necessary basis of your experience as a whole.
The properties of the body being being.
No properties of the well, yeah, four elements, but properties of the four elements, meaning the the universal characteristics.
You did not create it.
You have no say in its existence.
17:18
It's UN honorable.
It's headed to to, to to to sort of decomposition.
All of those things are perpetually implicit in that body being there and saying I'm upon a something.
17:37
Memory of your breathing.
Memory of your acute, presently enduring action of breathing.
So you're not accessing it through directly feeling your breathing and watching it.
You're accessing it through the image of your mind, recollecting it.
Indirect.
17:57
As a situation.
So you realize you could bring yourself through recollecting rightly through the past, so to speak, through the memories.
You could bring yourself to the present moment here and now, but see it through the memory of the present moment here and now, not through you attending the present moment here and now.
18:17
That's the difference.
That's the indirect way.
That's basically the only song.
That's how you rightly attend to it.
And that you could say that this is the most significant memory, the act of breathing like in terms of your your existence.
18:34
Oh yeah, that can have all that.
Those implications would on then reveal themselves more and more.
But even if you like, if you don't go like for the further steps of anupanasati, you know, breathing like this and regard your body in this way, regard your mind in that way, just knowingly, He breathes out.
18:50
Knowingly he breathes in.
Yeah.
Because again, memory, knowledge, memory is something that you know things that you know Do you need to constantly observe them?
No, once you know them, once you understood them, they disappear and then they just the mind just recollects them.
19:11
Cuz mind and images that is, that is its domain, that is its feeding ground.
That's how it exists.
So rather than trying to figure out and the relationship between the two which results in, as I said, appropriation of either or both, develop this passion towards the entire domain by by by favoring certain images and memories rather than others.
19:38
So favor those that are not.
They are rooted in non greed, non aversion that lead to dispassion that lead to disenchantment.
So favor the the images of a suba.
Favor the suba aspects of the images that you recollect.
19:54
Favor the the, the duca aspects of the images that you that you recollect.
Like establish them peripherally as that basis and see by the way, like now remember something from like 20 years ago, some event doesn't matter.
20:16
Obviously you unobserved yourself from here to remember an image from 20 years ago, but that image from 20 years ago is here.
Yeah, Yeah.
So don't forget it to come back here.
But while you remember it through it, see it being here as it is.
20:34
The stove and the floor and all of us, it is here, factually here and now.
For you, from your point of view, that memory doesn't matter how old, how far away was, it exists here and now.
In the same sense these other phenomena exist.
20:51
Because if it doesn't, what did you remember?
What are you talking about?
How did you even understand my question?
My suggestion?
You wouldn't.
You wouldn't have.
The Super is just the aspect that you can take upon anything, the aspect of the ugly, which is unavoidable.
21:07
By the fact that.
Well, that the body is disgusting.
If the body were not disgusting, the Super would not be possible, but the body is actually disgusting.
Orifice is oozing, sweat, hair.
I mean, isolate those things outside of the intoxicated context of beautiful and they're quite disgusting.
21:24
As I said to say, own mother would be disgusted with her son, with her child's body, if if she was to attend to it like that.
It's a disgusting thing.
He's just been buried under under a kind of wrongly, directly attending to only the pleasing aspects.
21:40
So you develop this image now.
The proliferated and all this kind of ugly is not even associated with it while it's still made out of it.
Because you can be having any perception of beautiful without the body.
Exactly.
And the bodies factually.
21:56
So you just have to uncover that.
But you won't uncover the ugliness if you directly try to see it, but you will uncover it.
If you see when I said like, like in the early all this is when I said like, oh, you you find things they're already given or you find the body they're already given.
22:14
Well, that means it.
You you remember it like you find this body already given existing this situation, how do you find it?
Oh, by remembering it has already been there, so finding things already existing independent of you.
It's already a form of memory, just obviously have more immediate memories and then you have more distant memories.
22:36
But either way, memory is really such it exists here.
And again, if you see that memory of the past event or the present event here and now as something that's here and now, that is the most acute.
Well, that's when mindfulness becomes some vagina, when it becomes awareness.
22:57
But the point is to arrive through that acute awareness here and now.
Not to directly leaping into it with your attention as people would just think they should do it, but by fortifying that indirect way of seeing something that is here and now without directly looking at it.
23:17
And you start that by seeing the body as a necessary basis, still already induced there and not forgetting it, always having the threat of recollection connected to it.
So that's why obviously, as I said, container sense, restraint, containing yourself, containing body actions are completely not negotiable.
23:41
They have to be developed beforehand.
But then mentally as well, you have to start containing your mind from like just just flowing into these abstractions or fantasies or delights and so on, and just confine it to where it is.
Oh yeah, even if I allow this choice of fantasizing about this so that it will be done so here and now on the base of this body.
24:04
So let me not forget about the body.
And if you don't forget about the body entirely to that extent, you'll be anchored rightly.
So even thoughts that present themselves will not take it too far out where you like kind of lost the thread, lost the connection, and that's the anchor of memory of the body or the memory.
24:34
And if you kind of start over thinking what is the memory or somebody you listen to this might do that well, remember anything, just remember anything from the past.
And then OK, let me now in the same manner, remember this body here.
24:54
That's all.
So let me know directly attend to the body.
Let me just remember it that now while I'm thinking this, oh, the body is here as a necessary basis.
And have that image endure, protected.
Don't describe yourself for him from it.
But obviously things will be coming and going, intensifying and fading away.
25:13
Regardless of what's coming, coming, or going away, you try and sustain the necessity of the body being there for either.
And then obviously you can apply the same to feelings in the other other set of botanas, the mental set of botana.
25:39
Can you have anything, absolutely anything discernible, anything that you can perceive that does not imply an image, Mental image?
Inconceivable.
If you say I see nothing, it's just emptiness.
Well, that's an image to that extent.
And that's why if you were to practice memory of the body rightly, you would be practicing the memory of the mental images rightly, memory of the dumbness correctly.
26:06
Because yeah, where are the thoughts?
Are they in your head, In your skull?
But it's kind of implicit like see, oh, it's not there.
So it's kind of like is it what?
What?
What's the measure for the insideness of your thoughts?
26:22
No, it's just an assumption.
And to the to the to the extent that you assume that your thoughts are in your head, to that extent they're not here and now they're all there and now true.
And the reason why this is important, so why you're calling memory?
26:37
Well, because it clearly shows the different direction from which you have to approach that indirect way.
As I keep saying, you have to see your body indirectly, because we even maybe will hear that they will still try to attend to it directly.
Just think there is some secret back door as opposed to, OK, I don't look here, but where do I look?
26:55
I still try to, like, find it.
No, it's on the level of memory of anything else.
So if you learned that that's where you have to stop, well, you're closer to doing it, rightly you.
It's less likely you'll be perpetually overdoing it or overly attending it.
27:11
So remember something from this morning, OK?
Now in the same manner, remember something from right now that that sort of pertains to your body.
Remember your body right now and have that.
OK, I remember that.
OK, leave it there and try to now protect that image without attend to.
27:29
I feel my knees and sensations and so on completely unnecessary and actually it's it's detrimental.
It takes you away from the right level and that's that body there, the image of that, the right memory of the bodies.
27:52
As an Anabanasadasa says, it's body among the bodies that you can experience.
It stands for that which body is.
So it's sufficient for development.
Memory of breathing has the memory of the implicit body, and that's enough for fulfilling the set of times, cause the point of the right recollection.
28:23
It's not, as I said, to define what that body truly is or to access it.
It's just to learn how to see it to the right extent.
Not too much, not too little.
And that's the hardest part, basically, in practice, not to forget well, to find the balance between, I think.
28:47
It would depend on people like different people, different preferences, different views.
Some people will be taken in overdoing it, some people will be taking direction of under doing, like over ignoring it and so on.
So but like learning the extent that you should try and like recognize and cultivate and recognizing that it's not about directly attending it or overly defining it, but it's certainly not about just just just letting it float away and ignoring the whole thing.
29:16
Like, no, you got to recollect, but you got to leave it on the level of that image of memory, memory image, Turbine will call it.
And then eventually you get used to, you see, oh, that memory, that image is present here and now, while I'm talking about the body and the image of it.
And then memory endures in the same sense my sights endure.
29:35
And that's already a form of establishing mindfulness.
And it doesn't matter what's happening on the level of other senses.
That remains unaffected.
But you have to kind of stick with that.
Well, better throw that.
29:52
I satisfaction.
Exactly.
Exactly.
It's basically your own crazy.
You set it up rightly.
And then you're like well.
And then there is this pressure to next step.
Yeah, but by, but by.
Then not doing that next.
Step.
This is actually.
How you undercut?
The desire and the grasping.
30:07
Yeah, well.
Yeah, by just letting it be there.
Because you cannot.
Do this to the background basically.
Well, yeah, When it's set up rightly, it's threatening.
You're you and you want.
It feels uncomfortable again, Yeah.
I think for most people it would.
It would certainly initially feel uncomfortable.
30:24
It would feel incomplete.
Yeah.
And if you don't recognize, see if you still judge whether things are right or not, whether they go in the right direction or not, by whether they feel complete or incomplete.
You're judging with your own misguided criteria.
30:41
But if you learn enough that, regardless of how incomplete you might feel, keep it there.
If you keep it there sufficiently enough, you will recognize that it's it's more than complete.
It's like what I was saying before that that is similar like imagine you, you know you're waiting for a bus but there is no clear mark where the bus stop is.
31:01
So you stand at the spot because you learned that you should stand there.
But then or maybe I should go a bit forward or maybe I should go be back or maybe you know, and because of it you keep moving and and actually all of the place was right.
The fact is that you could not contain yourself from overdoing, underdoing, walking or you missed it.
31:19
You're not seeing it.
So there is that degree of faith necessary to like, but again, not like.
Some magic will happen, but more like degree of faith necessary to basically give you the strength to restrain yourself from overly defining it or just completely ignoring it and saying it doesn't matter what I think, everything will fall into place and whatnot.
31:43
So the point is to to basically contain yourself within that memory, like, so you have the right memory and now you have the pressure, the tendency to clarify it more and to attempt it even more specifically.
It's like I already framed that because if I do that, I'm losing the quality of this memory, the clarity of it.
32:02
So what if I just protect it?
Then I just start drifting away.
OK.
So let me bring it back now because the mind is getting a bit too loose.
So then you bring it back and you pick it up, sure, pick up the memory.
But now if you want to go, go tighter with it, well then you don't do that.
32:20
So it's learning how to stay on the right level.
And for that you need exactly.
You need to learn what the right level would be and then just keep doing it.
But.
The fact that you start from a position of craving means that.
32:43
I mean, it's inevitable that it has to be uncomfortable and to start with, this much to see.
It yeah.
And that's only like it would feel like incomplete, insufficient from all the views that you have and like craving to like complete it, fulfill it, get that Nirvana, get that freedom, get that right view.
33:01
And that's what I'm getting because you're acting out of your own preconceived notion affected by craving.
An assumption as to what is the measure of right or wrong?
What is the measure of beneficial and non beneficial?
33:29
So I have to be willing to put aside whatever.
You.
Well, including yeah, you don't even have to.
You don't even have to deal with it.
Just include it.
So you have say like, I say like OK, recollect your body here and now whatever position you're in, OK, you know what your position is.
See, that's already your right memory of the currently enduring body that's that's sort of necessary base for this situation.
33:53
And now I have a tendency to like grip it further.
There's this pressure they want to make it tend to it even more specifically.
Oh, that is a thing.
Now that's within the experience of body being here seated.
So instead of doing it and forgetting about that body being here as a seated sort of basis for your experience, you just include that experience as another movement within the body there that's seated that's remained unmoved in that sense, unchanged.
34:22
In the broader context, you haven't stood up.
So it's unchanged.
Oh, so for as long as I don't stand up, I have AI have a reference point exactly.
So even if you lapse, you remember it and it's unchanged and it's been enduring.
34:40
So it is also, I don't even have to constantly remember it, I just need to not when the choice to stand up or do something present itself.
I just need to see that there is a choice.
If I don't get out of it, container remains unchanged even if I don't think about it.
35:00
It seems to me that even that that moment of like, oh, I forgot that I was sitting, you know, I spent 30 minutes thinking, even having that thought sort of implies that you already know, yeah.
35:17
And you're and see.
Even if you even if you forgot.
Exactly.
So you forgot and spent half an hour thinking about it and it's like, oh, but the body is still seated, nothing has changed.
Thus my mindfulness has remained uninterrupted.
What would interrupt that mindfulness even if you remain seated?
35:36
Is it the thoughts?
Thoughts you had for half an hour with thoughts fueled with lust.
A version that would interrupt you.
But that was a choice you made.
There was a choice you think it kept perpetuating.
So if that's your kind of as I said before that's like the point you keep your eye on not like what thoughts are here every second you're seated.
36:00
You know that you have a memory of it.
Let the mind think while you're seated.
And even if you lapse, so to speak, for as long as that lapsing, for as long as that forgetfulness was not infected by last aversion, doubt, hindrances, your mindfulness has remained uninterrupted.
36:20
In other words, your forgetfulness was something you were mindful of.
The reference has contained it rightly and I think I said it in some early videos from Sri Lanka like learn how to forget mindfully.
In other words, when you forgetting it does not automatically going to last version illusion.
36:37
Could you kept an eye on those 3 characteristics and avoid them intentionally because you can't accidentally start thinking about the last last full thoughts and perpetuate them.
They might present themselves but you will be taking them up and then engaging with them further and that is what interrupts.
36:56
So if you don't go in that direction, even if you spend 6 hours or just thoughts, thinking and pondering, doesn't matter if everything else your your situation remains unchanging.
You don't go in the domain of last diversion, distraction, hindrances.
Your mindfulness is is unremitting and that's why it's effortless as well, because it's not you putting it forward constantly unmindful and mindful.
37:20
No the reference is the body enduring there.
So all you need to do is just touch base with it every now and then so to speak.
Everything else is contained with it like you know you have fenced your property thoroughly.
37:36
There cannot be last aversion delusion finding Wayne.
You have confidence in it now you let the cows graze and you stop seeing them.
They go behind the tree, go behind the stack of hay, go down the down the valley.
37:52
It's still within the band, within the within the fenced of it or exceeded position.
So it doesn't matter if you don't see them.
You know that you will see them when they come up.
But for that to develop that confidence, that's that diligence in regard to greed, diversion, illusion.
38:09
Choices of greed, diversion, illusion.
Not either image of last full image.
I must get you.
No, no, you had it.
What did you do when you had it?
Well, scared.
Because you were affected by you want to get rid of it.
That's overdoing it.
Oh, really welcoming it, thinking about it, giving it a bit more, let it take a bit longer, then I'll deal with it.
38:29
No, you shouldn't have done that even for a millisecond longer.
So work your way on that level.
Well, yeah, the fence will be established and then you can let the cows graze and thoughts, think whatever they want to think, mind, think whatever they want to think.
38:47
Because that was never a problem.