0:19
It might not be clear what it actually means to practice, you know, do something out of faith.
As you know you've been saying a few times recently especially that just based on faith somebody might practice rightly.
It doesn't matter whether they practice based on faith or based on, you know, ton of like reasoning.
0:40
But the point is that they practice rightly.
But what is that faith?
Yeah.
So, well, there you go.
You just kind of described it there.
In order to have faith, you need to know what you're actually supposed to do that is directly related to freedom from suffering.
1:00
It's not other way around.
You're not going to understand what you need to do on account of just blind faith.
I'll just do these random things and somehow the way out of suffering will become apparent to me.
So it's like you need to understand to a degree what needs to be done correctly and then find the motivation to do it either through reasoning or through faith.
1:26
Let's put it that way, cuz then it needs to be applied.
The effort needs to be made.
So say somebody understands to a degree gradual training what needs to be done, understands that the root of actions is where your intentions are and all of that.
1:49
And now he needs to start doing it on a day-to-day basis.
And sometimes he might not be quite clear as to why he should always like not act out of sensuality, or why he should always be watchful of intentions and why he should do this or that.
That's within the gradual training.
But out of faith he'll do it.
2:06
He won't spend much time rehashing why should I do this, what I'm already doing.
He'll just stick to it, doing it, But again on the right level.
But you could see exactly because there is kind of less discernment in regard to what specifically needs to be done in terms of the correct right training and practice.
2:27
It's very easy to then start conflating that.
I'll just emulate the external mode of behavior and not question it.
And that's my faith And that's, well, I guess you can call it a faith, but it's a completely not a faith that can they can give rise to Sotabat the.
2:47
Other thing I was thinking about this, this you can sort of have a particular idea of OK, like I have a lot of faith in such and such teacher.
It makes a lot of sense.
3:02
It, you know, really makes sense to me.
I've thought about it, but now just kind of this particular contemplation I was supposed to do, let me just do it.
That's something that you can do out of just a sense of duty or whatever, but it's not really possible to do the same.
3:19
Like to actually just not act out of unwholesome things, be watchful of one's intentions.
That's kind of not a particular thing.
It's not a specific.
Method method that you can just follow like that.
3:34
So that's kind of I think the main difference that it's or one difference.
And the other thing is I think even just in order to be able to do that, you already kind of have to be somewhat taking responsibility for your own idea or view of what you think or what you believe should be done as in rather than just a so and so said or this is, this is what I believe in and let.
4:02
Me and also like sometimes if you hear something that that does sort of resonate with with your current level of understanding and so on and you feel inspired and you feel like you have faith to do what that person says, well you should also ask yourself and no, like wait, but what is it that I find inspiring like in hearing this teaching from so and so?
4:24
I feel so inspired.
What is the inspiring aspect?
What facet of that inspires me?
Am I clear, or do I or I don't know?
Or?
Well, as long as there is an inspiration, I won't question you further.
4:40
No, you have to, because you might simply be inspired by the way somebody speaks and you still haven't understood what he's saying.
Yeah.
Are you inspired by the teacher or the teaching?
Yeah.
But then again, like when you say, OK, I'm inspired by the teaching, OK, but are you are you understanding it correctly or are you just reading into it what you already think teaching is?
5:01
And the the particular wording of this teacher allows you to to to put your take on it.
It's like, so you need to study it.
You need to study it closely.
You need to that's what we'll say, it takes time.
You need to kind of live with somebody I you need to actually be exposed to what they're saying for a period of time to get to know them, to get to see what they say, what they, what they mean and so on.
5:22
Because again, it's just words are just shells in terms of like externally approached.
They're just shells of the meaning.
You don't necessarily know what that person meant because those words, those shells might not mean the same to you.
So all of that we already bring a discernment, authenticity and clarity.
5:41
So then, even if even if you don't necessarily find the specific inspiration through a specific teacher by questioning like this, well, you'll be able to inspire yourself because you have the suitors, you have the stuff set, and now you kind of know to not just take it for granted because you develop that habit of questioning it.
6:00
So yeah, then you won't need an external inspiration in order to practice.
Yeah, that was the other thing I wanted to bring up.
Like a faith often kind of the idea of faith.
It does often imply faith in a particular guide or teacher or something.
Or a method or something palpable, measurable that I can forget about myself or my responsibility and just do it?
6:21
Just commit to it and do it.
Which it doesn't that obviously correctly at all.
I mean, yeah, you should follow the method of watching your intentions before every single action you make throughout the day.
So.
But how much of A method that is?
6:36
Well, you'll find out, but in a way, yeah.
If you need the method, commit to a method of that of the right kind.
But it's not.
It's not going to be found on that level, Yeah, yeah.
And that's and the reason that that's called faith, that there is an element of faith always, even if you have all of the, you know, even if you're just kind of committing absolutely to your reasoning and needing to understand everything, you still need to have some faith element.
7:08
Because where the work ends up really needing to be done is on a level where you can't supposed to give the example of the other talk recently about enduring things on the right level.
7:28
And you were talking about seeing them as phenomenon and so on.
And you there was one point then somebody made this.
You know, if you were to see it as a phenomenon correctly, that pressure won't be felt.
But you don't see that end of this when you're starting just having to kind of learn how to endure it on the right level.
7:53
And that's the whole point.
Like you can't kind of put that result in front of yourself as a kind of a carrot or something.
You need to be able to sort of just endure it without any precondition or any limits, and that's like without seeing the end of it without.
8:12
Knowing that's the that's the actual faith.
That's.
Where the faith actually comes in.
Yeah.
So you know, theoretically, but once you start doing it practically you that theory won't apply your ideas of it when you're pressured, when you have to endure and not act out and practice sense restraint.
8:29
So again, you can, you can then mask that by saying, well, it's my duty, it's my identity, it's my, it's the tradition, it's whatever.
Or you cannot fall into that.
But then yes, then you won't have any other confirmation or affirmation that what you're doing is right and you just stick to it to that extent that you don't know.
8:47
And that's because again, what you're doing is simply refrain.
Well, what you're doing is what you know you should be doing, which is refrain from sensuality, not act out.
But obviously, as I said, when those things are actively pressuring you, you kind of you need there is a, there is a this, this need of, OK, give me some affirmation of this, some reassurance that what I'm doing is right.
9:12
Although you know that what you're doing is right, you're not acting out of sensuality.
That is already right.
You might not feel how you want it to feel, but it is right.
So have faith in that knowledge, have faith in that instruction and stick to it.
That's what faith means.
So you realize really, faith in terms of like saga from the Sutas should should be translated as confidence, not not faith.
9:33
I mean faith in the wrong once we clarify everything else around it.
But more accurately, it's really confidence.
So I'm confident that what I know I should be doing is the right thing on account of reasoning, on account of everything else, on account of information, on account of pondering.
9:49
So I'm doing it out of that confidence.
She's like, I have confidence in instruction implies to that degree you have some discernment of the instruction like what are you confident about.
But if you say I have faith in instruction means I just need to surrender to it and my work's done like same.
10:06
I have faith in Jesus or or whatever.
It's like, no, I have confidence in the teaching.
OK, well please explain the extent that you understood it.
That gives you confidence.
Then maybe I'll get the same confidence, but I have faith in it.
How well is he's the greatest.
He's the best.
OK, great.
10:21
So I approve that.
So I have faith because he's the great, he's the best.
I'll be the same.
I'll be saved.
I'll be the saved one.
But like, well, that's not confidence.
That is just the blind faith A.
Reminder of the suitor.
I might read it now that it's like even though you understand that that renunciation is peaceful, yet you don't do it when it comes to it, you know you can do it when you you can.
10:45
Yeah, you're doing it, doing it, doing it.
But when the pressure builds up, you give it up.
Yeah.
Even if I know that it's peaceful, I've reasoned it out to a great extent.
Why am I not?
Why does my mind launch out towards renunciation?
Cuz you have what?
Am I missing Develop confidence in what you already know?
11:03
You don't have enough faith in it or because you haven't given up desire?
Well no, you haven't given up desire cuz you haven't given up desire and you haven't given it up cuz you don't have enough faith in giving it up.
So the point is, the time will come, as I said, when no amount of your information can do the work for you.
11:20
And then you have to endure the pressure of desire.
And that's where your faith in what you know is measured.
I I I have no reason to not act out of this sensuality.
My mind is already made-up.
I'm gonna go.
I'm gonna take it.
I'm gonna get it.
But I know I shouldn't.
11:37
Just that.
Pretty much remote.
Abstract, far removed.
No weight whatsoever to it.
Thought of I shouldn't do it.
You have faith in that enough and you won't do it.
So yeah, if you keep breaking the presets means you don't have enough faith in not breaking the presets, that faith won't just magically appear in these thoughts You need to.
12:02
So if if you don't have enough faith, you need to build it up, you build it up through developing that confidence.
Confidence that this is actually the way out there.
This is what I fundamentally want to achieve, even through sensuality.
It's actually achieved through sense restraint, peace, equilibrium satisfaction.
12:18
Yeah, so you're questioning what faith you have?
Yeah, you question what ways you have, see if you like it and you like it if you, as I say, if you keep acting out and then actually start making the effort.
So instead of just sitting down and seeking, chasing calm for pleasant experiences, sit down and keep reviewing, revisiting and building up that confidence in things that you know you should be doing.
12:45
And yet you keep failing.
You keep failing because you haven't obviously thought it well through, because if you did, it would have sunk in deeper.
And that means when when things are like the at the toughest point, you would have enough faith.
13:00
Despite of how how pressure to act you are, you have enough faith to not act out and just weather the storm.
So you don't weather the storm and you don't have faith in what you're doing during that storm.
I sense restraint.
So how about how do I stop breaking the precepts?
13:18
That's how I stop breaking the precepts.
By constantly reflecting and pondering on the dangers of doing so, on the benefits of not doing so on on on everything else that's involved.
Like like your day-to-day actions, the the pedals of desires, the the, the disruption of peace, all of that.
13:37
And you will gradually be increasing that faith and and being able to not act out more and more.
But it's not magically gonna happen on account of just practicing calming.
Then when pressure comes, my mind is disrupted now.
And everything that that I heard before and that I know or even that I understood has no wait now for the duration of this pressure and I'll just act out that that time has to come for everyone.
14:04
And that's where you measure your actual faith.
That's we said that before.
That's where like somebody like an actual sort of banner is not an Anagami yet, because he might be lacking faith within, you know, within his great state of faith and confidence on some specific aspects.
14:19
He might not have enough faith exactly to stick to certain behaviors.
They would be taking him away from sensuality further.
So he would review that.
He could review that.
And I like faith in those crucial little moments of giving in here and there.
14:36
So what if I don't give in and build up my faith through through remembering, truly collecting the danger, the peril, the dissatisfaction?
It goes every against everything that I already worked for pretty much at that point.
So recollect that, ponder on that frequently, as the Buddha would say, and the mind will lean in that direction.
14:57
But see, people don't ponder on things frequently at all with that kind of intent, right?
Intent behind it.
Like they might ponder on something and then adopt the view on account of it.
And that's it.
My work is done.
15:13
And then now give me a calming technique, a practice sensation, watching a bit of this bit of external duty.
I just do this because everybody else does.
And I shall not be reflecting or pondering or revisiting the stuff again because that is unpleasant.
It's like, no, the practice is frequently recollect.
15:31
Again, not mechanically.
Go through the words and mantras, but revise, recollect, bring up, I tell.
Your mind.
Does ideas?
Yeah, exactly.
Ideas, contexts, information that you learned before until the mind actually starts to settle in there.
15:50
And the more often you do that, the right type of recollection, the calmer the mind would be, the less disturbed.
And same when the Buddha says in the suitors, the householder who has the right view, he's samadhi.
He's pleasant, abiding like Jonah for monks is when he frequently recollects the Buddha, the Dhamma, the Sangha, the unbroken virtue.
16:14
Again, not as a blind recital to a golden shrine, but actually recollects the value, the meaning, the point, his involvement makes it alive through recollection and diligent mental effort.
And there and then he has pleasant abiding there and now nothing can touch him.
16:32
Sati.
Exactly.
Sati, you can't have too much of recollection.
So if somebody likes faith is because they haven't recollected enough.
16:47
Yeah, haven't dwelt on it long enough, haven't clarified it long enough.
And that's that is the measure.
Actually, somebody can be full of faith but has zero confidence.
Like if you were to ask them, if you were to interrogate them and question about the practice, they'll be all over the place and there'll be absolutely no confidence there.
17:04
They still might be blinded by that faith, they still might not accept what you have to say, but their lack of confidence in their own words will become very apparent.
Actually, that's nearly the more the more you lack confidence, the more faith you need.
Yeah, you need to compensate it for, yeah, yeah.
So you can't see the discrepancy.
17:20
Maybe you have real faith in this teacher and but that the the the teaching is is discrepant, although there are these contradictions which you're not seeing.
Yeah, yeah.
Nobody doubts that that that faith is real as such, but it's it's misguided.
Not authentic.
17:36
Yeah, exactly.
Misplaced.
So it's this is to say he has confidence in instruction, then he applies himself becomes a sort of partner and so he has faith in instruction, becomes a sort of partner.
17:53
And then he develops confirmed confidence in the teaching.
In other words, he saw it for himself.
Now his confidence has been confirmed.
I was going to say that's then that confirmed faith, but the real exactly.
So you could say he has confidence to degree, but he hasn't confirmed it still thoroughly for himself and for Sotopana, he has confirmed confidence in the teaching.
18:14
That is right because he actually is free from suffering.
So there is no greater verification of the truthfulness and the right right practice there.
So you could say his faith that then gets confirmed.
But see when you when you know now that this works, you're done.
18:30
There is no belief involved anymore.
Now you know you have confirmed it, that it works.
So you don't need to believe it and hope that it works.
It works cuz.
You you've escaped.
Yeah, like the suit of the hen having to sit on its eggs for chicken to lay out to come out safely.
18:46
You could say first time, say first time.
Hen doesn't necessarily know that if she lays on the eggs, the chicks would come out safely.
He has some confidence and some faith that that's how it works.
And then he does.
He does the work, it sits on the eggs and the chicks come out safely.
19:04
Then for the next time, she won't have to question it again because she has confirmed that that's what it works.
So in the beginning, for the first time, she might have doubt, had a lot of doubt of or should I get up now?
Should I stay?
How long should I stay?
Should I leave?
How quickly I have to return?
19:20
Maybe this won't work.
Maybe I need to leave them alone for them to hatch.
Maybe all of these thoughts would have been passing through his head, but if it actually sat on its eggs, the cheeks would have come out safely and then all the doubt was just wiped away cuz it was confirmed that that's how it works.
19:36
So next time she won't have the same doubts again, because all she needs to do is just not give in to those doubts cuz she knows that what she's doing is already right.
So she doesn't rely on any circumstance for her confidence.
19:53
Her confidence is is independent of any.
At that point afterwards, yes, exactly, exactly, exactly.
Yeah.
Nothing can come in between that.
That's exactly what he was described in the suitors by that Sotopana who said, well, even the whole world says one thing and the Buddha said the other the opposite.
20:09
Like the Buddha's, right?
Not because he's a fundamentalist blinded lunatic.
No, it's because he actually confirmed that thing for himself.
So nobody can come in between them.
If people say the opposite is because they haven't seen it for themselves.
So it's a direct directly visible here and now and that and that is and that should be the criteria by the way, even for somebody before they become a sort of banner and and start practicing and so on.
20:36
Like the goals, the results should be visible here and now.
Like, you know.
OK, initially it won't happen overnight.
It's not an instant thing.
You have to sit on the eggs, but OK.
But you know, I've been doing it for 20 years now, right?
20:54
Isn't that a bit long?
What is the right view?
I've been following this teaching or that teaching.
For how long?
Two days.
OK, maybe for a little bit longer.
Two years.
OK.
You know, is there any anything to show for five years, 10 years?
21:09
OK, come on now.
But not like just just dismiss that part of results and still just convince yourself that you're doing it right.
No, it it it should be happening.
21:26
So yes, there is a such thing to be a bit impatient, but then there is a such thing to like, completely disregard the fact that you will not know whether you're doing it rightly until you confirmed it that it is the right thing to do.
In other words, until you know for yourself.
21:41
Until you're assault upon it.
Comes down to not really disregard, not disregarding.
Not disregarding the goal.
Your own aim Exactly what is my aim?
When I have an aim, do what it takes to get.
21:59
To now that aim, obviously as I said, as you discern more will will become more refined let's say, let's put it that way then what it used to be.
But fundamentally you need to keep it in the play.
You need to keep it.
There is a relevant thing because you are doing this to be free from suffering.
22:18
So are you free from suffering?
Do you know the way out of suffering for yourself, independent of any circumstances?
Exactly.
Can something come in between it?
Can something cause doubt that would completely change the course of your effort?
Or do you know for yourself beyond?
22:34
Doubt cannot be shaken.
You know exactly what suffering is and what escape from it is exactly.
There's nothing that can come in between.
It's like the most direct thing you see and feel obviously by that point.
And you can kind of apply that way of thinking even if you don't know for yourself.
22:59
You can think, well, is my current understanding along the lines that could not be turned upside down by something or whatever exactly.
And and then well, kind of find out you can't go into like particulars and turn them around to fit without changing the whole thing.
23:17
Yeah exactly.
But kind of to find where your understanding or misunderstanding does not have that nature of being unable to be, well mistaken or turned.
Yeah, it needs to be sound, needs to be free from contradiction.
23:34
If from like you might be emotionally invested in it and which is why it will be unpleasant to question it and you're emotionally invested because you know freedom from suffering is taken personally.
It's important.
So that's fine, that's understandable.
But that should not prevent you from questioning it.
23:52
So you need to know that it is a sound thing that can hold the water as it said and so and that exactly cannot be upturned by by the opposing view.
In other words, you would see opposing view where the where it lacks, but it doesn't add up because you thought your view through you didn't just accept it took it on and now a disagreement comes or something that says I know that's wrong and you just go into defense mode without recognizing wait, but do I see where this applies?
24:20
Maybe it's right?
What if it is right?
Do I know that it isn't right?
Do I know that I'm right?
Or do I just desperately need to believe that I'm right and have to shut everything else out?
Even if you don't know for yourself yet, you can certainly not find fault or any contradiction in the value of sense restraint and saying not sensuality.
24:45
You'll find a lot of pain in it.
But that's not to say that it's not a logically sound conclusion that it's better to be withdrawn from desires and attacked out of them and not scratching the edge.
You know that colloquially you already know that everybody knows that.
It's just they don't have enough reasons cuz they haven't recollected sufficiently enough of the dangers, the context, the benefits.
25:08
So they lack faith.
They lack faith in sticking to it.
This is this is that suitor?
Mentioned.
Says This is the layman speaking to Venable Ananda, says Bunte Ananda.
25:23
We laymen enjoy essential pleasures, take the light in central pleasures, and rejoice in essential pleasures.
Renunciation seems like a precipice to us.
I have heard that in this dumb and disciplined there are very young because who, you know, go forth and delight in that pronunciation.
25:43
But how come my mind doesn't delight in it even though I know in theory all?
This.
The teaching already.
So anyway, the there's a bit of a further discussion.
But the Buddha, the Buddha says before my enlightenment, while I was just a bodhisattered, it occurred to me, good is renunciation, good is solitude.
26:08
Yet my mind did not launch out upon renunciation and become calm, settled and liberated.
In it, though I saw it as peaceful, it occurred to me, why is it that my mind does not launch out upon pronunciation?
Then it occurred to me I have not seen the danger in central pleasures, and I have not cultivated that insight.
26:28
So that's even before he was enlightened, yeah?
I have not thought about it.
I have not achieved the benefit in renunciation and have not pursued it.
Therefore my mind does not launch out upon renunciation and then and it's then later, he says.
26:50
If, having seen the danger in central pleasure, I would cultivate that insight, and if having achieved the benefit in renunciation, I would pursue it, since it is sometime later.
Having seen a danger in central pleasures, I cultivated that insight.
Cultivate insight.
27:07
Recollect it, reflect on it.
You get a degree of understanding.
Then cultivate that understanding further.
So that's your meditation, That's your practice.
Not like mindlessly sitting and switching the thoughts off and experiencing pleasant bodily sensations and then waking up from it and then not knowing how to deal with stuff.
27:26
When it starts to pressuring you because you haven't dealt with anything, you just shutting yourself down because you don't wanna deal with stuff.
That's pretty much it.
And that's completely the opposite of what the practice is.
So reflect, recollect, sit down to meditate, quote, UN quote.
27:42
And by that I mean sit down and spend an hour dedicated hour of your time in like a motionless state of recollecting and reflecting and cultivating the insights of the danger, the peril.
And when you get off your cushion, the danger, the traps, the baits will be all around you and you will not go towards them and you will maintain the context of the of the dissatisfaction and and the precipice.
28:08
If you do and all of that and learn how to live among the bait without touching the bait like the the deer herds you get to.
You need to learn that it's not magically going to be revealed and highlighted little markers around the bait.
No, you need to discern that and maintain that.
28:24
And then you become comfortable within it.
And then obviously having not been trapped for a long time, you're going to develop even more confidence in it because you're actually free.
You can run in between the bait and you will not get caught.
That's how confident you'll be.
28:42
You want it to shelter yourself in that sense.
But that needs that takes work, diligence, recollection, reflection, maintenance of the context and enduring of the pressure of acting out that you don't don't give into yes.
And and the suit goes on, you see the danger in that sensuality.
28:58
You cultivate that insight and the further away you obviously seeing something as dangerous, you're going to be moving away from this fashion, not engaging.
And that results in the first genre of a piece of renunciation that's in.
29:15
So he's done nothing else except reflect.
Where the baits are, Where the traps are, and we're drawing the same self from the traps, there is no I don't know, what do I say?
What should I say no to yeah, cuz you haven't reflected on things long enough.
If you do, it will become clearer and there will be layers and layers that you can peel until you specifically directly recognize the roots of central desire.
29:36
In the beginning, yeah, you maybe have to say no to too many things unnecessarily so, so it will cause you a bit more pain.
But if you make the effort to reflect, recollect, cultivate those insights, it will crystallize more and more and then you really know I can relax.
29:52
Actually, this is not dangerous.
That's not dangerous.
This is not root in sensuality, but measure.
For that is the internal knowledge, not the external criteria or the word of another.
Now obviously there are certain obvious things that are always rooted in sensuality, so things basically against the precepts, and I mean like say 5 precepts with the third preset being celibacy.
30:16
That's kind of intoxication, lying, stealing and all of that and central desire, distraction through your senses and sense objects.
Yeah, So you need to say no to that always, you know, like you can't go wrong there.
Because more often than not, your intention will always be the root in sensuality when it comes to those things.
30:35
But the cultivation needs to happen often, frequently reflecting.
But just saying no to things.
But still exactly hiring them?
Well, that's the thing, people.
Yes.
Start by saying no to things.
And what do you do then?
Do you just hope now that on account of you saying no, truth will become apparent?
30:54
Or have you once you said no?
Are you now reflecting and recollecting and cultivating insights into danger, peril so that you don't have to forcefully say no?
You simply wouldn't want to go there when you recognize the danger of it.
This is funny because maybe some people say you know the the pleasure of jhana will will help you not go back to sensuality.
31:15
Yeah, No.
Yeah, that's the common misconception of.
Sensuality will not make you go back to century.
Exactly.
And that's the John which is.
Which is what the pleasure of.
It is, yeah.
Which is what the pleasure of John is, yeah.
It's like this pleasure will surmount this joy and satisfaction.
31:31
Like, yeah, I'll get the pleasure.
So great that I will not want any pleasure lesser than that.
Well, that's the definition of sensuality.
That's exactly like let me just get this and I'll never want anything else again.
That's like every central design, doesn't matter how big or small it might be.
31:51
And even in that same suit as his he was thinking about second John.
But why?
And he understood.
But why doesn't his his mind launch out to bonnet and get the the same thing?
Just because he was finding delight in that first John at the thinking and and once he saw that as an affliction, the danger.
32:11
In that the danger, the obstacle, the lack of refinement, then yeah, once he withdrew himself from first Jana into second, yeah, so first Jana is the withdrawal from sensuality, Second John is withdrawal from the first Jana, Third John is withdrawal from the 2nd Jana. 4 John is withdrawal from the third John.
32:29
It's not like, oh, I leap into it.
And then there's no, no but completely withdrawing, abandoning desire for this, removing any, any kind of affinity towards it, Seeing the danger, the peril, the the the lack of satisfaction.
That's how you enter the next one.
32:46
By seeing the affliction of the first Jana.
Yeah, he.
Enters and is that sort of the cow?
Was it the similar the cow were steps on one stone and doesn't gain its balance and steadiness there but wants to step on the next one and then falls between the two.
So same like somebody starts withdrawing from sensuality sensor for Jana, but then he wants the 2nd Jana and then he gets neither.
33:10
So withdrawal from desires internally, externally drying up.