0:02
So this is the first suit of Majumanikaya Majumanika #1, and it's called Mula Pariahasuta, which in English it's translated as the root of all things.
0:24
So it begins by describing, by saying that the Buddha was staying near Ukata in the Subaga Forest and he was talking to the monks.
So he addressed them.
Saying, monks, I will teach you the explanation of the root of all things.
0:44
Listen and apply your minds.
Well, I will speak.
So the will continues.
Take an unlearned ordinary person who has not seen the noble ones, and it's neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of the noble Ones.
They have not seen true persons and the neither skilled nor trained in the teaching of true persons.
1:06
So this is a description of a ptujana of somebody who does not have the right view.
So when the Buddha decided to begin this exposition of the root of all things, like what is what is it the root of anything that you might experience, he started by with a case of Ptujana.
1:28
So somebody who is not Sutapana, who does not understand the way out of suffering for that person, the Buddha says they perceive earth as earth.
Having perceived earth as earth, they conceive earth, they conceive in earth, they conceive from earth, they conceive earth, is mine, they delight in earth.
1:55
So first thing here it's as as you will see.
Obviously the sutra starts by listing earth, water, fired air.
The four grade elements then goes into all sorts of other phenomena.
The point there is to paint the picture of any direction, anything big, small, far, or near, personal, impersonal, lofty, coarse, sublime, divine.
2:30
The emphasis is that the root of any of those things.
It's on the way Protujuna perceives it as it will become clearer later on in the Suta when a Buddha speaks about the noble disciple, on the other hand.
So the root of all things that exist for Protujuna, however lofty, however course, is in his perception of them.
2:53
So when he perceives those things, he does not understand that.
So when he perceives, he then conceives earth, he conceives what he perceives, he conceives in earth, he conceives apart from earth, he conceives earth, is mine, he delights in earth.
3:13
So these attitudes that are described here, conceiving, conceiving in conceiving from, conceiving mind, delighting in they're not like linear sort of linear steps the protugeon is doing, they're more like the immediate implications of him already delighting in earth.
3:38
So as the word has said in other sort of ignorance is beginningless.
So you could obviously infer here you could say the same, that conceiving is beginningless.
There is no like time before which Protugena did not misconceive things, and then he started misconceiving them all he has.
4:01
Or if he were to look in the direction of earth, water, fire, air, God, and so on, he'll find him delighting in phenomena.
First.
Through that delight he can discern that there is conceiving.
So whether he conceives earth, whether he conceives in from apart, he conceive it as mine.
4:21
He conceives himself as separate from that phenomenon.
So when he perceives earth is earth through the perception of earth, he puts himself outside of that earth, so to speak.
In other words, he becomes the master, the owner, the center, the Falcon of the experience.
4:37
That's pretty much the definition of Atavada sense of self that's independent of the five aggregates.
And that's the point in the Suta.
Somebody might wonder why does the Buddha list all these, not just all these elements, but in these gods and gods of streaming radiance and brahmas and stuff.
4:55
It's just to show that on any plane of existence, on any layer, in any direction, whatever can be perceived, Putujun is misconceiving it not because of the things he's perceiving, but because of his attitude of of the light and misconceiving of the ownership of his perception.
5:17
He might not conceived that he owns a Brahma, but he's if he were to perceive it, for example.
But he's certainly conceiving the perception of sight, the presence of sight as his.
So that's why again, the point here, it's not to look for the specific things.
5:35
The root of all things means like the root of the framework of all things.
So it's not about specific things, but it's about these, the most general representatives of the framework of your senses, of your mind, of your perception, because that's where these conceiving take place.
5:54
So having perceived earth is earth to general, conceives Earth, conceives in earth, conceives from earth, conceives as mine.
He delights in it.
Why is that?
Because he has not completely understood it so, and the lack of understanding of his perception of earth means there's gonna be some form of conceiving.
6:20
Conceiving earth in a part means there will be sense of ownership of perception, sense of mind.
There will be delight in things that are then perceived on that secondary level.
So the suitor continues about water, So he perceives protugenas.
6:40
They perceive water is water.
They perceive fire is fire.
They perceive air is air.
Beings is beings, Gods is gods.
The progenitor as the progenitor.
Brahma is Brahma, those of streaming radiance, as those of streaming radiance, replete with glory as replete with glory.
7:05
Abundant fruit.
Those of abundant fruit, they perceive the Conqueror as the Conqueror, and so on.
So it carries on after covering all these, all these realms, all these possible things that someone's even expanded mind might perceive.
7:21
The point is the root of all of that, of the existence of all of that, and how it exists for you, so to speak.
It's within your own perception or ignorance of it.
So as it says, he perceives all of that he conceives, he conceives his mind, he delights in it, because he has not completely understood it.
7:40
Then he carries on to the dimension of infinite space, the dimension of infinite consciousness, the dimension of nothingness.
So these are the considered as finery, material, mental comprehensions and establishments of the mind dimension of neither perception nor perception, the the utmost one that a protujun could technically establish his mind correctly.
8:08
Then it goes to the senses.
Anything that's seen, heard, sensed, touched, smelt thought, doesn't matter.
He will be misconceiving it because he has not completely understood the nature of perception or in other words what he perceives.
8:29
He will then automatically, I want to say automatically but really simultaneously misconceive.
That's an again that what I what I said in the beginning.
There is no starting point where there is a pure perception of protugeon, a clean, unadulterated, unperverted, and then that somehow gradually step by step gets infected with these conceiving and then it becomes mind becomes delight.
8:55
That's a linear explanation of somebody who is approaching this from the outside point of view, like the commentaries and so on.
Internally, when you look at it, what you see is delight.
Within the delight you'll find ownership, because it would be impossible to delight in things unless you already implying ownership of perception that can find joy and pleasure in these sense objects.
9:16
For example, within the ownership, you're going to find that that thing, that phenomena in its broadest presence, manifestation of itself, that thing is conceived as something separate from you, as something over here or in here.
9:32
Or apart from.
In other words, you gratuitously assume your own standpoint of perceiving that thing as too independent of that thing, so to speak.
You perceive it as an observer, as sorry.
9:50
You assume it as an observer, as something that is, that is there regardless of what's being perceived.
Petition certainly does not see that his sense of self is undermined by what he perceives.
By random perceptions, by any perception, it's undermined by the presence of the aggregates.
10:09
So the pseudo continues after it lists all the senses.
Then it goes to anything that can be known, anything that can be cognized.
He hasn't fully understood.
That's why he conceived then oneness.
The sense of oneness, the sense of diversity and then goes to the all the broader sense of his experience.
10:26
The widest phenomenon of the all, internal, external, past, future, present doesn't matter.
The perception of the all again it was never the problem.
It was his not understanding the nature of perception of it.
10:42
That's how he conceives it.
So then after the the perception of the says, they perceive Nibbana.
So Protujana can actually perceive the phenomenon of Nibana.
Like as the Sutas described, Nibana is a dama, another phenomenon that has a reason that is present and but it's the only dama that is asanka dama, which means the dama that's undetermined or deactivated, let's put it that way.
11:09
And by that it's meant that within the experience Nibana is to be found within the experience of the five aggregates.
So it's not on the level of a mystical phenomenon that will then be be found outside of one's perception, outside of one's five aggregates, The fact that it's listed here and there are other suitors.
11:30
Imagine the car where the Buddha says yes when somebody here and outside the reputation, he describes Nibbana and he says I'm attaining this Nibbana.
This Nibbana is mine.
The Buddha said factually what he's stating is what Nibbana is, but he's not attaining it.
11:46
He's not being established in it because he still hasn't uprooted that fundamental wrong view in regard to his five Aggrades.
He hasn't uprooted the Atavada.
So he's taking the ownership of it.
So if you wonder then what is that Nibbana?
Well, as I said, it's nothing mystical outside of the experience.
12:03
It cannot be.
I mean saying that there is something outside of experience on account of this experience is another phenomenon that you're designating within this experience.
So Nibbana within this experience is the phenomenon of complete, top to bottom dispassion in regard to any phenomenon in the world.
12:22
So Protugena could technically, if he's like very diligent, restrained and obviously wise to a degree, could develop his mind to the point that he experienced complete dispassion in regard to everything past, present, future, far, near, big or small, divine, sublime course.
12:42
But what he will not be able to do is to experience complete dispassion towards that phenomenon of dispassion towards anything.
Obviously if a person does develop that say hypothetically and then they get to hear the Buddhist teaching, they'll probably need like 1/2 a sentence just for that last thing to fall into place because obviously the mind is already developed.
13:04
But the point the Buddha illustrates here that even Ibana will be misconceived for somebody who does not understand Earth is earth, who is through perceiving it, misconceiving it.
And another reason why.
Another thing that's important to mention here is that you have to basically you have to recognize that when it says he perceives Earth as Earth for example, his perception is already affected with that ignorance.
13:34
Otherwise it would not be simultaneously implying conceivings and delight.
And the reason why I bring this up is because it should certainly be enough to do away with any contemporary notion of practice that revolves around perceiving and observing impartially sensations, or just any general perceptions.
13:57
Basically, any methodical approach to the practice that implies neutrality of your observation, it's wrong because your perception is not neutral.
If it were neutral, it would not lead to conceiving, It would not lead, it will not imply conceiving, It will not imply ownership.
14:13
It will not imply delight.
But as the Guru describes, the root of all for Protugena is his delight, which implies ownership, which implies conceiving, which implies already misperceiving.
So the bare awareness, the pure perception, the the pristine seeing of things, it's not pristine for as long as there is no right view.
14:34
So what, Protugena thinks it's objective perception.
It's already his misappropriated sense of ownership, delighting in things that he's perceiving.
So then the suta continues and talks about the trainee, the noble disciple.
14:52
So there's a monk who is a trainee who hasn't achieved their goal, but he lives, aspiring to the supreme sanctuary from the yoke.
He directly knows Earth is Earth, so it doesn't say he perceives so he's not perceiving it anymore because perception is reserved for a protrusion.
The tugenous perception is perception with avija, with ignorance.
15:12
A sotepan our higher has understood the nature of their perception.
So that's why when he perceives, he directly knows Earth is Earth.
Having directly known Earth is Earth.
Let him not conceive Earth.
Let him not conceive in Earth.
Let him not conceive from Earth.
15:27
Let him not conceive Earth is mine, let him not the light in Earth.
So let's first address directly knowing Earth is earth.
What is that?
Well, that is pretty much the right view.
That is the Sotopana's recognition through Yoni Suman E Sikara that say perceiving Earth, he knows that that Earth that he's attending, that broad phenomenon of solidity of of one of the the the four great elements that he's attending to.
15:56
He knows that its origin, its manifestation, is its impermanence.
He knows that because things are manifested, their manifestation is there.
Anita He doesn't need to wait for those things to last, to possess, to discern them, to see how they end.
16:17
He knows that simply whatever doesn't matter how long it lasts, doesn't matter what direction it goes.
What matters is that it is.
And because it is, that's why it's impermanent, not because it will later on cease.
That's why the when the the inside of Sotepan in Sutta is described like or whatever, well usually translated whatever has the nature of arising has the nature of ceasing more accurately more acutely.
16:43
It's like whatever has the nature to manifest its manifestation is its ending.
Manifestation carries its end because it came on its own.
So that's what it means to directly know Earth is earth or water is water or Brahmas is Brahmas or Nibana is Nibana for that matter.
17:03
The recognition that manifestation that you're perceiving is already implying its impermanence.
Having directly known Earth is Earth, the Buddha says let him not conceive Earth.
So how does he then not conceive?
He should not conceive it.
17:19
Well, He should not conceive it by not lapsing from by not ignoring that that earth is impermanent due to its own manifestation, doesn't matter how long it lasts, and how permanent he might seem.
Permanent is seen as something that's manifested.
17:35
And on the level of that manifestation things are impermanent because they are manifested.
And so that's the second part is when he then encourages him to not like psychologize.
Having having understood, Let me not do this, and then let me not do that, but more like to encourages him to make the effort to sustain the direct knowledge of phenomena as phenomena, as the other suitors described through keeping the precepts Naykama, Sankapa, the thoughts of renunciation, seclusion and withdrawal.
18:08
So those secondary efforts, so to speak, would protect that context and bring that knowledge of earth is earth, water is water, fire is fire to fruition.
And then he will not even have to think.
All this earth or this phenomenon perceiving are not mine.
18:25
They won't be his, because by directly seeing he's unconceiving them.
By unconceiving them there is no implicit ownership.
Without implicit ownership there is no delight.
As I said, for the Protugena, you already start with the delight.
So for a sorta panner, although in that broad fundamental sense he has understood the nature of perception, on a more immediate level, he still might.
18:49
He still will have for as long as he's not, on the other hand, delight in this or that.
Some habits of delight in other inferior things, things that are secondary.
So he needs to protect the context so that even those habits of delight and finding pleasure in things that are fundamentally directly known as unownable, he needs to protect this context for a while until it sort of seeps into everything.
19:11
That's why the the encouragement towards the practice of the noble it for path and so on.
It's more like just the the encouragement of a certain lifestyle that can then bring his understanding.
His direct knowledge of earth is earth to fulfillment.
And the proof of that is when the Buddha describes later on about Arahant and the Buddha, they also directly know Earth is earth.
19:33
So that's the common thread.
The insight into earth is earth.
It's impermanent because it's manifested.
No other reason required is the insight that's in common from a sotepana all the way to the Buddha.
19:49
So it's the same way of perceiving things.
The difference at the end of the spectrum where Arahant is, is that that insight has been developed, has been brought to fulfillment.
So Sotepan is encouraged to protect it, nourish it, feed it, so that that insight then takes over in regard to everything.
20:06
And all the habits of delight and ownership are uprooted.
So it's not a psychologizing method that he needs to keep telling himself.
In order to develop it.
And then it says like why is that?
Why the Buddha encourages him then to protect the context and and practice it and and and and grow it so that he may completely understand what he understood over there.
20:29
So he understood it but not to its fulfillment.
And then he goes obviously list all these factors.
Sorry all these other phenomena.
Nibbana is Nibana, and so on.
Arahant.
A monk who is perfected with defilements, ended, who has completed a spiritual journey, done what has to be done, laid down the burden, achieve the true goal, utterly exhausted the fatal being.
20:55
He's rightly free through the ultimate knowledge.
He also directly knows Earth is Earth, so there is nothing that he knows behind that Earth.
It's not like he discovered a transcendental reality.
He knows earth is earth by seeing the consciousness outside of the aggregates, the pure awareness and so on.
21:12
That's completely the contradiction in terms.
He knows earth is earth.
He knows Brahmas is Brahmas.
He knows neither perception.
Whatever experience might arise, he knows it's in.
He knows it in its manifestation, nothing else required.
Having directly known it, he doesn't conceive it.
21:30
So the Buddha doesn't need to encourage him or he should not conceive it.
He should make the effort to prevent conceiving to.
Kind of take place again, and grow further, and so on.
So having directly known Earth is Earth, he does not conceive it does not conceive in it, from it he does not conceive it as his, and he does not delight.
21:50
Why?
Because he has completely understood it.
So then it lists continues listing few more instances of an arrow hunt.
And then instead of like saying because he fully understood it, it's because he he's fully free from greed.
22:06
Then because he's fully free from hatred, he's fully free from delusion.
Other words, he's fully understood it.
So let me just go to the next page, yeah, so free from hate and free from delusion.
22:25
And then he goes about talks about the Buddha.
They realized the perfected one fully awakened.
He also directly knows earth is earth.
Having directly known it.
He does not conceive it, does not conceive in it apart from it does not conceive, it is mine.
There's no delight in it.
Why?
Because the Buddha has completely understood it to the end.
22:42
And then adds the Sudha, adds these further knowledges that the Buddha so he understood it completely to the end.
Then the Buddha also understood that delight is the root of suffering.
So the presence of delight, as I said, implies the presence of ownership, which implies A conceiving one of these, and that is the root of suffering.
23:09
If that delight is prevented from spreading and growing, one suffering will diminish, even for a protuja.
Now if one suffering diminishes in that sense through not being proliferated through perpetual delight that's not kept in check, then mind is developed.
23:26
Which means then even Putujana would be closer to understand that delight is root of suffering, that there is no delight that does not imply craving Impossible.
And basically the closer to that simultaneous recognition of presence of delight means presence of suffering.
23:47
Putujana is getting closer to understanding the Four Noble Truths.
So then it says the Buddha has understood delight is the root of suffering, and thus that with being there is birth and whatever is born gets old and dies.
In other words, he's describing the entire scope of a human life again that is present through your delight here and now.
24:08
You're delighting implies the ownership, which implies your sense of self, which implies your own sense of being here and now And that which is born into this plane, like from birth till basically till till the end when you die means that anything that that happens, anything that exists within that anything that that whole plane is liable to you will partake in that liability.
24:35
So by freeing yourself from the light here and now, you can undo your birth and you can't prevent the body from breaking apart and aggregates sort of passing away.
But if you remove the light, you remove the ownership.
If there is no ownership means this whole domain destined to the destruction and decomposition.
24:53
It does not belong to you, which means whatever it's waiting to happen to it won't be your problem, won't be happening to it to you.
That's why the suit is when the Buddha talks about death of an arhant, when an arhant dies, he doesn't use the word death, he refers to it as the breakup of the aggregates.
25:12
But protuja dies.
So death implies the ownership of that which is liable to die at any given moment.
Freedom from ownership means, oh, it's just these aggregates, they came together, they break apart.
But there is no owner there, there is no being is extinguished, so there is no death applicable.
25:38
So yeah, so it basically describes the Buddha, describes his understanding, and then it says that the monks did not delight in what the Buddha said.
And this could possibly mean that it simply went over the heads in its own kind of not completely over the heads, but to a degree, like as I said, we have now these sutras, it's all written down, You can study, you can scroll, you can reread.
26:03
But back then imagine you're listening the Buddha.
And obviously these whole records of this are like kind of templates of memories, of instruction, obviously the details of speech that are not contained.
So imagine you were there, listening to something as in comprehensive as this, pointing to like for example, pointing to not just the delight and ownership, but the implicit conceivings of it in all the directions, in all the permutations, in all the ways, all the things that could be perceived.
26:36
It's a bit much to take there and then.
So the monks that were listening to this were probably already a noble disciples.
At least he wouldn't have been teaching this to because he would make no difference to them.
But they didn't delight because it just there was so much to unpack and the point.
26:53
Like as I said before, see we talked about conceiving.
He talks about the structural existence of your ownership.
That implies conceiving that on top of it has the implicit delight.
But even for a noble disciple, if it's somebody with the right view, that if he were to approach it, he won't see these conceiving.
27:11
He can later distinguish them on account of the instruction, like from the suitor for example.
But all he sees is his delight in things, and then he can discern the the simultaneously present sense of ownership sense of I am.
So when then the bullet talks about what's within that while that's like way past their like practical recognition.
27:32
So they didn't delight in the words.
But that's not to say that they obviously did not understand the framework of what he was saying here.
They just couldn't get all the details.
So.
So that would conclude the Mullah Pariya Suta.
27:50
And obviously again if say somebody who doesn't have the right view come across the Suta, it doesn't really have carries that like a value of the practical application.
28:11
But that doesn't mean that you shouldn't be trying to understand it, cuz even a protuja could benefit from understanding that, for example, Nibana is not the mystical experience outside of these aggregates that you somehow escape into.
I mean that's what I would have said for as far as the language and the designation goes for as far as basically you can perceive phenomena and call them a name, even if it's the most general, broadest ambiguous name, it is really such.
28:38
And as far as the designation and the language goes, that's how far the target has understood, so that's how far he has laid out the teaching.
In other words, there is no secret reality behind the conventions and concepts as sometimes it is thought.
And there is no problem with that.
28:56
You don't need a secret reality, cuz again, even if it's a hidden reality that you discover, it's still gonna be something you perceive, which means it's not hidden.
It was only relatively hidden.
It's still within the five aggregates, within the perception within.
So there's no outside of you.
And so simply by studying this sort of by recognizing, even if it's the the novelty of the perceiving of the gods and and streaming radiance, novelty is just generated by what you were like, by your common perception.
29:26
But fundamentally, whether it's a common or uncommon perception, whether it's mundane or super mundane, whether it's the novelty of the experience perceptions there.
And you realize it's not about the specific experience, experiences of, you know, some of these people think the attainments will be the specific energies and new experiences coming over and so on.
29:48
It doesn't matter how new IT is.
That's never where the emphasis was or should be.
The emphasis is whether it's new or old, personal, impersonal, lofty, the most sublime experience ever had experiences there as such.
30:05
It's manifested as such.
It's impermanent.
So you stop being concerned about the content of your experience, which means you'll stop looking for Nibbana outside of this content, outside of the mundane.
And when you stop looking outside of it, outside of the mundane, you get to understand the mundane, and you get to understand the nature of perception on a kind of mundane, and that's all that's necessary.
30:28
Then you will directly know Earth is Earth.
You will directly know seen is seen, heard is heard, Doesn't matter.
You don't need a special perception to tell you the truth, because that's never where the emphasis was, that's never where the problem was.
That's why that's not the root of all.
30:44
The Buddha didn't say see the root of all these things.
It's this another thing that you perceive specially underneath it all.
No, he said.
Even perceiving the all, even perceiving the oneness, the diversity, the unity, the Nibbana, it's the perception of it affected with ignorance for putujana or direct knowledge for a noble disciple and another hunt.