0:03
So let's talk about the right view then.
Like, how would you describe it?
How would you describe the right view?
0:27
Knowledge of knowledge of absence of suffering.
That is not that's not your knowledge, but that's just, that's not something that you create that that they're because you want it or because you kind of created it.
0:54
It's basically knowledge of how the mind is, how the body is, how the aggregates are in and of themselves.
That leaves no room for for great aversion or delusion.
1:16
Is there any other way that you could describe it?
Because that can be taken by anybody.
There's nothing.
There's nothing in the description you provided that could not be assimilated.
What?
Do you mean assimilated?
Assimilated by somebody who is also says like, yeah, of course I know, but the bodies but the mind is I know the great version, but still they're not sort of.
1:44
Is there another way to convey the right view that a would not be able to relate to it so easily?
Inappropriate it so quickly anyway.
2:00
Well, there's that description that goes along the lines of.
No, no, I mean your description.
Well, when you see for yourself what is for your harm and others harm and what is for your benefit and others benefit and not, well, not others, but like, yeah, so see that connection between the way you live your life and the result of that?
2:33
Not just that's good and that's bad again.
Yeah, that's all wrong, but the same.
It's on the same level like.
Even can be.
Yeah.
Anybody with with like basic amount of information can say, yeah, of course I know how my actions lead to my welfare or not.
2:51
Any anything more acute?
Yeah.
It's like, yeah, because it is like what you're just speaking about.
He knows what is a waste of time or what is not a.
Waste of time.
But then, is there anybody can assimilate?
That so basically all these are descriptions of the result of the right view.
3:10
That is like what is the right view that somebody without a right view can't just, Oh yeah, of course I'll just assimilate that because kind of reason my way around it as as she started again in or what what Nandika said as well both are correct.
3:29
But as I said even somebody without a right view can easily assimilate the same description and say yeah, of course, oh that's I have a right view now because I understand that.
So it has to be something more acute in terms of describing the review that the position cannot assimilate because he would go over his head.
So yeah, I'm asking for some examples of that.
3:55
The inability to be moved by whatever you experience.
The inability to take it personally.
But then again, again.
It's correct, it's correct, but.
Whatever is, whatever thing is, is there and you can say it even like so there's there's greed, there's aversion, there's delusion, There's like your or emotion or feelings or pressures.
4:32
And The thing is that if these if whatever is whatever is a thing, is seen as a thing including a feeling or something that's like pressuring you.
But if it's if, if it's actually just seen for what it is.
4:51
The thing is that it can't.
Anything that's like that could be called greed, that could be called aversion, or could be called like anger, or whatever.
Whatever creates suffering, whatever is unwholesome, whatever can make a person do bad things.
5:13
Whatever is, none of that can be there.
None of that.
None of that.
None of that can be there when any include any feeling or any pressure whenever that's seen for itself it just there's no room for those things.
5:29
But it's not because you I think the important thing is it's not you getting rid of it.
It's not you knowing how to see a thing as a thing.
Knowing how to see a thing as a thing so that there is no room for the for the this kind of any gratuitous anxiety.
5:53
Any any fear.
Absence of fear, like 0.
Fear basically where there's no room for us but not because you got rid of this or you did something to us but just the knowledge of how it cannot be there.
And it's this was like not only and The thing is it's also not about just being able to like experience that absence of sense of freedom once or kind of having a sense of it but actually knowing where it came from, what led to it, what made it possible.
6:26
And and so not just kind of randomly being able to I don't know make your mind calm or you can make your mind genuinely calm or free or have like a sense of complete freedom.
But that doesn't constitute the right view.
It's more it's it's knowledge of how that comes about can.
6:48
You be more specific, because I can just now read this eight full Path and everything else and essays on it and say that's how it comes about.
And it's actually.
Correct.
That's how it comes about.
7:04
It's correct, but that wouldn't be.
No, but I'm, I know it wouldn't be, but I'm saying is when you say our knowledge of how it comes about, again it's something potentially I can relate because he might be have been studying the suitors a lot.
So yeah, go, go ahead then.
Give me a more specific example of how that knowledge comes about.
7:26
You said it's it's not that you do something on account of these things, it's how you see them.
Yes.
So how you see them?
How do you see them?
That you guys were just asking to describe, yeah.
How do you see them?
7:43
Because, yes, exactly.
And see, that's already something that conclusion will have harder time assimilating quickly.
Because he's used to doing stuff, yes.
He's used to managing things.
He's used to countering things.
7:59
He's used to, you know, spending time in concentration so that the mind and his comes so that then I'm not bothered and all these things.
But if you say, oh, it's none of that, It's completely the opposite direction of that.
It's not what you're doing, and it's certainly not that you have to do something.
8:17
It's more like simply the way you see things.
But now that can be mystified And you say, oh, seeing the way things are and it's just oneness and easyness and so on.
So you have to be more specific.
So then how do you see things that instantaneously doesn't even free you from fear?
8:39
It's simply there is no.
There is no room for.
Fear.
Even if you want to be afraid, there is no room for fear to to be there.
Yeah, and I think fear.
Is.
How do you see it?
Fear is a specific one, like or an anxiety of let's say fear anxiety duka.
But they're the.
Yeah.
9:01
So it's not on the level of like the describing the thing, but describing how to see it.
Yeah, well, how it's seen, How it's seen.
Yeah, either way.
As as in risen, as manifested.
But that's again.
It doesn't.
Doesn't.
End so that's the right viewing.
9:20
The right viewing, yeah.
The right view is the right viewing, yeah.
So the the the way you see it, the way you the right view is a way of seeing things detached.
Yeah, that's that's all correct.
9:37
But the actual seeing of it describe that, not what comes as a result of seeing and.
Then yeah, so.
Right, right, right.
Rightly see even about.
Like, because even seeing it's like, Oh well, I'm seeing that I'm there.
9:53
Has to be some word you.
So I just use that because you said that you can use word attending, which is more correct.
It's the way you attended, you know, looking at it necessarily in that sense.
I mean, you could describe your only so many Sicara.
Yeah, yeah, of course.
So describe then you only so many Sicara in ways relevant to fear or Duca that you just brought up.
10:17
Then a petitioner would not be able to relate to because he's used to managing his duca and fear.
So how can you then attend And there isn't thing, so that there is no room for that thing to exhibit pressure or any form of duca on you.
10:38
So describe that way of attending.
11:31
So take the experience of anxiety or fear and describe to me how you would be attending to it.
11:55
You said attending to the situation as a whole.
You know, detached from what you know, the fear, at the same time simultaneously seeing the body there.
So you, everything, you, you, you, cutting up things.
12:11
Things are detached, cut apart.
You know, like that's so many of the the butcher and the cow.
Yeah.
Yeah, so things are like that.
But I want it more acutely.
So without resorting to oh, you can do this, so you can do that.
12:29
You have the experience of frightening experience or anxiety just in the relation to that.
How can you attend to it That will result in there being no room for any discomfort.
12:52
Besides saying not not myself.
Well.
Besides, besides that, not myself as the.
Result of it, but it's.
Yeah, once you know how to write attended, you can keep reminding yourself, but not for me, not mine, not myself as would encourage it.
But I wanted just acutely on the way of seeing it as it is right there, seeing through it that again, you don't have to do anything else.
13:16
That's why it's liberating.
That's why amidst suffering so the panel doesn't suffer.
It's a nature of.
All of that's correct, but none of that is the acute.
Again, yes, ceasing nature, it's on the level of the insight because you attended to rightly.
13:36
What is that attending to the rightly?
That's what I want to described.
Well, in a way not putting yourself in relation to it.
We're not trying to see it or overly define it or just in by not putting things where you want them to be or in a way you want them to be or you do anyway.
13:57
You don't want them to be in a way seeing them.
You can.
Only do that because so your ability to attend is second to it being there second in it's in a kind of a sitting on top of this, it's not like you you're not not able to like choose to attend to is it precedes the the fact that you're already attending to us.
14:27
Yeah.
And that's and it's that like kind of already there Ness.
So.
That is kind of the thing that you need to.
Attend.
Attend without attend attending it.
Yeah.
So it's like not attending it but recognising it as kind of already underneath the attention and and then that's it's that element basically that it is impossible to appropriate or impossible to own impossible like even if you want, even if you.
15:00
Even if you turn all of your attention to.
Try to try to make it yours.
Try to.
You know you can't because because it's just it's impossible.
It's undermined and always remains out of the reach.
15:15
Basically it's completely out.
And like you know, even if you know, even if you doubt it, with all your mind, even if nothing can't completely inaccessible and it's inaccessible because that's that's literally just how it is and it's so it's under exactly like it is undermines.
15:34
It's undermined already or it undermines itself as you put it.
And that's there's no room.
There's just it's impossible for there to be anxiety.
It's just not there's there's no there's no basis for it and it's not it's it's not like oh, I just I'm not moved by this or whatever.
15:57
There's just there's no possibility, no basis for for anxiety or.
Yeah, yeah.
There's no possibility of being moved by it.
Yeah.
And that's that's exactly.
No, that's it.
See, that's that cannot be appropriated so easily.
And it all boils down to that.
16:14
Like a person turned out, everyone is used to attending to things, and he puts that first, They put that first.
So the fact that you're already attending to dealing with your anxiety of fear means he has a reason already.
16:34
It's been enduring there underneath, so to speak.
It presented itself.
You find it there through your attention.
But the weight, the emphasis, is on your attention.
So although it came second, so to speak, structurally, not necessarily temporarily, you put that first.
16:55
So your attention in dealing with it is the centre of the experience, Failing to understand that all of your efforts, all of your movements, all of your concerns, all of your cravings, all of your reactions, actions and counteractions and so on are because The thing is still there, enduring.
17:13
So that's why sense restraint has to come first.
So you stop acting out in those grossly outward ways, and then internally you still might be moving and the mind still might be jumping at the prospects of dealing with it and doing this, encountering it.
17:29
But through all of that, through saying yes, no, both yes and no, neither yes, no, no.
If you donate that, and if you are making some effort to discern what else is simultaneously there, you'll find it's the reason thing that is simultaneously there with you attending to it.
17:49
And that thing comes first, not your attention.
And then yeah, then there is no room for anything there, nothing else.
It's with this.
This is the petition para principle.
That's why whoever sees the dama sees petition para.
18:05
Whoever sees petition para sees the Dama.
In other words, Sotopana begins to see Patitzopala.
And yeah, that's that's why it's like it's instantaneous.
That's why it's a Kalika.
It's timeless because there is no time involved between you attending to this and that thing being given.
18:29
And that's why it's not a matter of like, then, yeah, then it becomes timeless.
As in it is not.
It's not a matter of doing some other unrelated or sort of semi related things, more like literally just practicing or.
18:45
You're developing that?
Developing that same.
Yeah, that simultaneous recognition further and further, and preventing yourself from engaging with it in these manners that would put your attention first.
19:04
So by that I mean not distracting yourself like because there will still be insult upon his experience, There would still be aspects of his life that are still putting his attention first as opposed to the the the experience he's attending such as sensuality, ill will, hindrances and so on.
19:29
And that's how you put it from my chronic.
But he does have the principle, the principle being how do I free myself from this hindrance or from that issue or this issue by seeing through it, not by doing this or that.
And and yeah, that's that's why it's like directly visible here and now, not involving time for as long as there are five aggregates, there is the possibility of seeing through them correctly.
20:02
And that is that's an important point.
That's like, that's the direct.
That's another way of describing the direct relationship or relevance of virtue and sense restraint, as in because if you haven't been developing virtue, haven't been developing sensitraint.
20:21
It doesn't matter what language or how much you try to wrap your head around this kind of notion.
Your whole, yeah, your whole mindset is just about me controlling things, me doing.
Exactly.
That's what we say so often enduring things on the right level.
20:37
So if you have not always said something and he's completely wrong, and although I know I'm upset and I shouldn't say anything while I'm upset, I'll still say because it's for greater good, it's for the benefit of everybody.
I must point out the mistake you feel externally justified internally.
20:54
You acted out of pressure of ill will or irritation or whatever, which means for as long as you're not able to endure those things rightly, internally, for as long as it takes, regardless of what kind of injustice you're looking at, and so on means you haven't endured things sufficiently enough.
21:10
And that means, basically, you refuse.
By by refusing to endure it sufficiently enough, you refuse to put your attention of the issue second.
Like, even if you keep saying to yourself, I'm not, I'm not.
I'm attending through this and I'm seeing through it and I'm not giving it priority.
21:28
You do simply by acting out, by not being able to endure.
That's how you you you actually already pivot your.
You already put your attention first as well.
Should be second and.
That's also why it's it's impossible to build up any sense of another thing.
22:00
I was thinking about Build up any sense of conceit, for example on the right practice like because people do that.
With any other kind of spiritual practice I feel better.
And you might be factually kind of developing, developing some things that genuinely sort of make you more virtuous but more able to manage things, but less so for less than other people and so on.
22:27
But you can't.
You can see, you can't do it.
And even like, even if you come across is whatever extremely confident or blunt or rude, that's not the measure of conceit.
If if people think that's conceited, it's could.
Usually.
They themselves cannot understand behaviour.
22:46
They could be like that, but it's not effectively conceived because if they were to behave that way, it would be conceived.
So it's a kind of fallacy that they project, and it's that whole kind of understanding that's that's implied when you, when you discern how to attend things rightly in a way of not attending them, attending that which is there without attending it, then yeah, no, no room for unwholesome, no room for vanity, for conceit, for sensuality, no room for hindrances.
23:26
But I met a rider.
Any other way we can describe attending to things without attending them?
23:46
Like how can you attend things without attending them?
Isn't there a contradiction?
Well, like you said, it's about where you put the emphasis.
24:02
So recognizing that to be able to attend to something, it has to be.
There.
So what is?
How can you say it differently?
Has to be there.
How can that be described?
Not given.
24:24
Beforehand.
Given beforehand, yeah.
So what is given beforehand has to be there.
What are those things have in common you don't have?
Like how do you know that They know?
They know exactly.
I was going to say, how do you know that?
Because you know that.
You know, and that's.
24:39
And that's not you doing.
Exactly.
That's actually nearly away.
If you can ask what do, What do I know?
As in what's what?
Can I not help?
But.
No, And that's actually even even just the meaning of the word knowledge.
Yeah, that's that's literally just what it means.
24:55
What's given.
Absolutely, yeah.
Consciousness.
Yeah, but conscious of.
But again like it's sort of it's been proliferated so much.
The people I when they talk about consciousness it's not nowhere near the consciousness.
25:14
So you have to kind of find a practical basis such as whatever experience of fear or this or that as we did and then talk about attention and then talk about OK, but so you the fact that you're attending it, the fact that you're dealing with it means it's it's given beforehand.
25:30
It was a reason there on its own.
It came first, so to speak, not before, so the same time, But it's under you.
Let's say like that.
And it's like, oh, but you do already know that, which is why you're choosing to attend to it in this manner.
25:49
In that manner, trying to get rid of it, trying to do this, trying to do that, 'cause it's already known to that extent, Yeah, sure, you don't understand it, because if you did, you wouldn't be trying to act out of it.
You would then emphasize the knowledge of it being there beforehand while it's exerting pressure on you, and refrain from acting out of that pressure, which would tip the the, the, the scales back onto that perverted order.
26:19
And that's kind of probably, I think, the most acutely that you could describe how to get the right view for somebody who doesn't have the right view When faced with Duca.
Big or small doesn't matter.
By not acting out of it, you discern that it's given beforehand.
26:38
While you're not acting out of it for as long as it takes forever, you're ready to do it forever.
To emphasize the discernment of what you already know, at the expense of acting out of it and telling to yourself that it came there because beforehand, and everything else because you really want to get rid of it.
26:59
And that's the the subtle trap that Putuja's mind would be falling into.
So this is perfectly intelligible.
You can understand this, but then when you're actually under the pressure of some form of Duca, your first emphasis is attend to it through the attitude of wanting it to go away, wanting to get rid of it and now you do what Rajini Molly said.
27:28
All right, so it's there beforehand, given I know that.
See, none of that is actually correct now.
So first and foremost is I mustn't do anything, including what I said you must do.
So then what you're left with you get to discern as being there, and then don't act out of it and rinse and repeat.
27:56
And if you're keeping the precepts and celibate you want to need, you wouldn't need to be seeking Duca for your practice.
There were plenty plenty pressures to go around.
28:21
What other way can you use to describe that so you can know it without?
Well, you can attend it without attending it in the ways of you used to.
28:41
You can know it is being given beforehand again without attending indirectly.
You recognize that it's there on its own.
What other ways?
What are the description of that relationship between you and that thing between you and arisen Dama?
29:00
How can you describe it?
They will not involve time.
They will not require doing.
What are the properties?
They're on its own terms.
On its own terms, yeah.
29:32
What's the property of that experience as a whole few experiencing pressure of anxiety to act out of it.
So you have the original phenomenon of pressure, discomfort, you know, that thing out of it.
So what's the what are the characteristics of that experience you under that pressure that has arisen of its own and so on and so forth.
30:00
Most like the main characteristics, they would prevent you from putting yourself 1st and trying to deal with it even if you want to, even if your mind is still revolving around those thoughts rightly established attitude of what would disable any effectiveness of the mental tendencies to put yourself 1st and deal with discomfort or engage with comfort.
30:30
If viewed rightly, what will be the most impersonal characteristic of the right viewing?
That's what that that is impersonal.
Yeah, but what makes it impersonal characteristic, what makes it impermanent?
30:45
It's.
It's.
So it's no, no, no, no.
Hold on, we're drifting away now we're just listing things.
So we're we're talking about your experience being under the pressure of a recent phenomenon.
31:04
So it's like me dealing with this or not dealing with this, attending it or not, both neither.
What do I do?
Move left, right, up, down, the way of evaded indulge, give up.
So there is that relationship between you and that thing.
So what is the main core characteristic of that relationship?
31:26
That is why thing is impermanent.
That is why The thing is unknownable.
That is why, if you're viewing it through that characteristic of that relationship, you will be unable to put yourself first.
So you're talking about this relate like as in you you there's you and this.
31:45
Yeah, there is you and there is the pressure.
Yeah, that's why you put yourself 1st and what you want first.
So you're talking about how to then?
I'm talking about right viewing of that relationship, so.
That it What is?
Its core characteristic of that right viewing.
32:15
I would say kind of being complete in and of itself as in there's has they having no here you go like that's that's the entirety of it.
32:31
Is the entirety of it that there?
Isn't so.
When when when you have two things that are complete to each other extent, how do they relate?
What is the relationship then?
32:46
How would you call it?
Simultaneous.
Exactly.
Simultaneous and that's the point.
The simultaneity of it.
See, even if somebody without a right view were to start training simultaneously knowing what they're attending while they're attending it, he would bring them closer to the knowledge of that thing without needing to attempt to directly cause simultaneity of you.
33:09
And that thing is not something you can do.
Doesn't matter how much you emphasize your attending and your dealing and your movement and your reaction or whatever else, it remains unchanged.
It's all within that.
So with this, this is and for as long that remains unchanging that simultaneously is there.
33:30
And then you realize once you recognize that simultaneity, that's why you cannot own things, because your ownership comes second to it.
It's just one of the things, one of the one of the two things that are simultaneously dependent on each other to the extent that they are or try to own or trying to possess or trying to control or acting upon putting yourself first in regard to things that are simultaneously present.
33:55
It's the reason for Uduka.
That's why they're impermanent, because they are otherwise.
Yeah.
And and that's also because if you see that that's simultaneous and the dependency of it that you can't have the sense of like if you if it's the sense of me for example and this other thing.
34:18
No, you have.
But what?
Yeah, you have that.
You start with that, yeah.
But you you see them as simultaneously dependent as if they kind of like it's literally kind of when.
There are, when there are.
I know.
That's why I said go on, carry on.
Because that brings you closer to the point when there are two and there is no other option there, there's neither can be the one, exactly.
34:40
And that's the point.
And that's why you do start with your sense of self.
You don't deny it, but by seeing it simultaneously dependent on something else, that's not your sense of self, right there to the same extent it will cease to be yours.
It will still remain Namarupa Vinyana, vinyana namarupa.
34:57
Dependence from petition para still remains in another hand.
What does not remain there is the ownership of either or both, and so on.
So exactly on the level of the experience as a whole.
Not like me in this chair or something, although if you're viewing it rightly it can be anything.
35:13
But in the beginning you need to start seeing it on the level of your experience as a whole, like your totality of your experience here and now.
Sit in this room, sense of I am with and then whatever, whatever, wherever your attention lands, whether it's a particular feeling or a thought or a memory or or or a pleasure or pain, doesn't matter.
35:34
Anything that you are relating to there and then to that extent, and if you start seeing it as simultaneously enduring, as opposed to me dealing with this, then me dealing with that, no, it's me dealing with this while both are there to the same extent.
35:52
Oh, a new me dealing with this with something new to the same extent, then a new me dealing with something new to the same extent 'cause that's what really is.
And it's the recognition of that simultaneity that can bring you the closest to the right view.
36:09
And it's not something you can do.
You cannot possibly lay out the method of step by step method of the 123 and then you see the simultaneity and that is pretty much the core of the the beginning that remains unchanged from the start till the end till the completion of the practice.
36:33
So the point is.
Get rid of.
Yeah.
So the point is like.
Do with this disease.
Yeah, exactly.
Because the actual principle of its own part, regardless of its formulation in the suitors, always starts with this.
This is, you must mean sati in a hoti.
36:51
That's it every single time.
Then it can sometimes be 8 factors, or 12 factors, or 16 factors, and so on.
But you realize the principle remains unchanged.
So you can't have the exemplification of principle contradicting the principle, because then it's not the exemplification of the principle.
37:07
So if the principle is with this, this is, then the exemplification of it has to be within that principle is just basic logic.
But again, given the whole commentarial tradition and abidama and the whole amount of of proliferated misleading information created on top of it.
37:28
Now when people here dependent origination, they have those those those wheel of life tankers and and stuff in the mind of how you know from rebirth protests and stuff like that, fully ignoring or being completely unaware of the principle.
37:45
So put the whole dependent origination aside as a formulation and just talk about yoni somena sicara which is already the principle of petition of parliament seen rightly.
And somebody who develops yoni somena sicara learns how to attend to things simultaneously without attending to them directly.
38:04
We'll then see how, but it's some part of formulation describes that very thing.
But it's highly likely you would arrive at that thing through studying partition part of formulation today because of everything that happened in between with commentarial and studies, studies and everything else.
Piles and piles and piles of pretty much misleading directions.
38:21
There's that other suitors says where the bullet gives us that basic description.
Do you see this?
Exactly, Yeah.
Imagine we got.
Do you see this as its condition?
Yeah.
And then?
He asked the monks.
The one who attends like this, can he doubt that?
Says no.
38:37
Impossible.
The one who doesn't attend to it like this can doubt the rise?
Yes.
That's like the most.
It's as acute as it gets.
39:02
Yeah, do you see this?
Do you see this as its condition?
I would do you see the cessation of this this condition?
Yeah, if this is not, would this be?
Yeah, yeah.
39:18
Is the uncertainty, isn't it?
Is the uncertainty when there's doubt in regard to this?
Yes, that's kind of a.
39:47
So take your sense of self, how however you might be feeling in its entirety here and now and then.
Discern without abandoning, without attending something else.
Discern within that acute, concrete, living sense of self that you are.
40:07
Discern that something in its core the dead self depends upon.
That it's not in your control.
Bring that thing up to be simultaneously there as an undermining condition for your sense of self.
40:30
And then let it endure.
And it's going to the mind will turn away from it, and then you repeat it.
And then you repeat it.
And then you repeat it.
And those same things, that's why.
40:47
And you will.
You should be feeling it.
Yeah.
It's not just on the level of like, OK, if you get your sense of self feeling this or that right here, right now, and while that's present, discern something in its heart that undermines it.
41:04
Yet it's not in your control, cannot be possessed without abandoning the sense of self here and now you you possess it when you make it a new thing, when you attend to it becomes your sense of self.
But now you've fallen from that simultaneous recognition.
So you're just moving from one to the other, from one to the other, maintaining your sense of ownership because you're not undermining things through that simultaneity.
41:28
So that's why it's important to regular sensor and not just attend to what under oh, that's an iche, that's an iche, that's an iche.
No, no, no.
Take your sense of self, however it feels, with its safety, with its ownership, with its implications, and without thinking about something else.
41:45
Discern, even if it's a vague thing, that there must be something simultaneously present that actually your entirety of this experience of centre self depends upon.
Yet that thing cannot be yours at the same time.
It can be yours after, but then something else won't be yours at the same time, so you're always undermined wherever your attention rests, something else will undermine it.
42:12
But you can start, yeah, with just what makes you deeply anxious, this sort of deep existential anxiety that everybody experiences and see what is on the base.
What is that on the basis of that?
42:30
Well, first, first you, you, you will have to start with the extension anxiety and the first you will have to not put yourself first as somebody's trying to get rid of it.
So first there's essential society.
OK, now let me not try to get rid of it to see.
42:46
So the essential society is there.
The sense of self is there.
Yeah.
Let it in Europe and.
Then.
Keep it, keep it, maintain it simultaneously recognized.
And so then it like, that's why I think you could say like the same contemplations that would, without the right view, be the source of the deepest fear or anxiety would become the most pleasant thing to think about really because that.
43:22
Is and it would bring you the closest to the right view because.
It is the measure then.
Of.
Liberation, there was actually that other.
It's something similar to that.
I mean, I think it may be said it would not be If it were not, it would not be.
43:39
It would not be for me.
It will not be and it will not be mine.
It won't be mine.
And and so he says this is terrifying to an ordinary person and to an an hour hunt or somebody or.
43:54
Or it's where the liberation is.
It is where the liberation.
Is.
And it's terrifying.
Not because it's genuinely terrifying in itself.
The cessation is not terrifying.
It's terrifying only if you still are unknowingly putting yourself first, which means your sense of ownership and control is there maintained.
44:11
And that's why this is the the utmost contradiction to it.
Challenge to it, and that's why it's the most frightening 1.
So if you have that, like you know, most people wouldn't be able to hold it at the same time without losing perspective, without being overwhelmed by the fear or anxiety, if it's on that level.
44:30
But you can work up to it, and you woke up to it by with what I just described.
So you start by recognizing I'm here to this extent, such and such.
My sense of self sense of I am really such no issue with it.
And with that experience as a whole, within that experience as a whole, without again trying to attend to a new thing or fall into like a linear psychological explanation.
44:54
Discern.
Well, even just take your your body present here, your beating heart, even there isn't feeling for that matter that pretty much defines your sense of self there and then you realize you had no say in its simultaneous presence there.
You have no say in the simultaneous presence of the beating heart here.
45:11
Yet my whole life depends on it.
This whole sense of self depends on this.
I mean living heart right here, as I'm thinking this if that changes the slightest obstruction or something, none of this can remain.
What do you do next to repeat it?
45:30
And if it's if you haven't forgotten it, if you haven't overly attended to it and made it into a new thing, then just just let it endure there.
And obviously you're going to feel it.
And that's the measure.
When you're right, attending kind of first makes you feel things more, but then makes you unfeel them.
45:49
Same thing.
You're not doing anything extra, just through repeatedly attending them.
The feelings were increasing.
The fear, the pressure.
You didn't back down.
You kept repeatedly attending to it, rightly, concurrently, indirectly, whichever you want to translate it.
46:07
And now those feelings are being unfelt while nothing has.
Nothing's changed.
Well, what is changing is the the shift of the emphasis from over here.
Me, I am on to not mine, not I am over there.
46:23
It still remains that which was self remain.
It's just not yours anymore.