0:00
I was wondering if we can speak about life and death, those two phenomenons, and death being the counterpart of life.
But first there's a suitor and it's called fragile or perishable.
0:21
So it's because I will teach you the fragile and the unfragile, the perishable and the unperishable.
What is the fragile and what is the unfragile form Is the fragile.
It's cessation, subsiding, passing away is the unfragile.
0:41
So feeling is the fragile.
Perception is the fragile.
Intentions are fragile, consciousness is fragile.
Their cessation, subsiding, passing away, is unfragile, unperishable.
That fact of the change remains.
1:01
So those things, those particular things, change in various ways.
They're subject to change.
But one thing that is not up for debate or subject to change is that, yeah, they're ending.
1:21
So in terms of like, we have the phenomenon of life and its counterpart.
So here's life, everything that I'm experiencing now, the all, if I can say that, yeah, myself included.
1:44
Yeah, everything.
And the background to that is this change, is this death?
You got to understand death as the background of death is implicit.
2:03
So because it's usually like death is perceived to be something at the end of the life like when when the when that time comes then death will arrive so to speak.
2:20
But actually, death is already here through.
The fact that you were manifested, that you were born already implies, as we say, often like the the manifestation of a thing, anything, any phenomenon, big or small.
2:38
Fun, it doesn't matter.
Manifestation of a thing is its impermanence.
The fact that it's manifested, the fact that it came to be, it's incomprehensible to you to stop that or prevent that.
It's just you.
It's inaccessible.
2:55
The manifestation of things, the presentation of phenomena, it's it's just something that's completely outside of your scope.
So death kind of it's on.
Obviously it's on that level, it's just in this, in a general sense, if you take the phenomenon of your life, the all that happens while you're alive, well, the implication of that life is that it is that it has come to be.
3:22
It's manifested.
So it's cessation is implicit in its manifestation.
That's what the would have said.
Like those who are unmindful, they are as if dead already.
3:39
Like you don't have to wait to die in order to be within death, all you need to do is exist within the mother's domain, or within the domain of that, which implies death.
That's already as if dead, because death is there through that implication.
4:02
Because if you see so if you see life, you will see its counterpart existing in the background, which is it's implication.
It's it's It cannot arise without that implication of death.
4:19
Life.
What do you mean cannot?
Arise.
I mean, you know, the fact that it is manifested.
Yeah, It cannot be conceived separate from.
It cannot be conceived without that implication in the broadest sense of that word.
So the point is, it's like, well, think of it like a simulates.
4:38
Say somebody is living within a waiting trap.
The big trap is just waiting to crush you.
You're completely unaware of the trap.
You're completely unaware of the thing hanging over your head, but you have absolutely well by being completely unaware that it's a trap.
4:57
You have absolutely no notion of escape, and even if you were to, even if somebody tell you it's a trap like you, you don't even know where to begin.
Like you don't even recognize it.
You don't even know that there is anything to be escaped or how to be escaped.
5:14
That's pretty much the existence of of of anyone who is living within the central domain with the wrong view, I being Pedrugina.
So they're as if that already.
Like, yes, technically their life, their birth is still manifested there, cuz they're still existing, but within the domain of the inevitable trap, inevitable cessation of that.
5:42
And you can see there.
And then while they're in that state, by not having the right view, by not being a sensory strain, you know that they don't even know.
They don't even have a notion of the escape, and as such they might as well be dead already.
6:00
So there's the other if you if you cultivate the context of death, then you cannot, you cannot delight in life.
You're you'll turn away from life.
Or as it says in the Suta, Upeka will be established or the counterpart will be established, but meaning the context will be nuclear death in the background implicit if you cultivate that.
6:28
Well, there you go again, on the base of the same simile.
If you get the right view and you recognize the trap as a trap, you recognize that whatever has the nature of arising, that's why it's impermanent.
Whatever has the nature to manifest, that is its impermanence.
You recognize the extent of the trap.
6:45
So if you then contemplate the existence of the implication of death in everything, in every in breath, in every out breath as the suitors would say, it's implicit like in that context and we said that before, but you know it doesn't hurt to to repeat it.
7:02
The contemplation of death in the suitors that's often talked about when he says like a monk should contemplate within and in breath, within and out breath.
He shouldn't.
Like he should contemplate death.
It doesn't mean he's doing it on the level.
It just means that his knowledge, his correct concurrent attending to the implicit death of this life, permeates even the most immediate action of breathing.
7:32
So you contemplate death on the level of in breath and out breath, not by watching sensations of in breath and out breath.
You contemplated by developing that background.
Context of the implication of that death so, so thoroughly that even breathing will remain, cannot remain unaffected by that context.
7:51
Yeah, any even the core of life, The sign of life.
Exactly.
Even the most heartbeat neutral kind of habitual action that you generally take for granted.
So even that will be permeated by the significance of the implication of death.
8:11
And you do that not just for the sake of contemplate death.
So hard to reach that point where you just kind of boom, you just step outside of it and you're free.
You contemplate it so that there is a complete dispassion towards anything regarding life and that's how you step outside of it and that's how you're free when there is no more passion towards that.
8:36
But that removes you, basically cancels you within that implication of death.
So in other words, you disappear from the trap.
Let's put it that way cuz you have no issue if a random trap falls.
8:55
If you're not in that trap, it's not your problem.
Cannot be your problem.
So it's only a problem when you are the one who's gonna be trapped or hit by that thing.
So obviously, ordinarily people will everybody knows I'm going to die, but that thought stands for something abstract in the future.
9:26
Stands for the idea of death, which is very much, as I said, misconceived notion of something that will happen at the end, whenever that end is, and so on in the future with the.
Time.
But it's so disconnected from this life.
Yeah, you don't wait for you don't.
9:42
Well, like if you know, if you need to wait for the actual dying to contemplate death, it's too late.
No, you contemplated within life, within that which was born, within that birth, within that manifestation.
But it although people know that or that what they already when I think it's at the end of my life that at the ends in the future.
10:13
Even if you had to cultivate that thought every day, for example, like some Stoics might have done or that they did exactly this, but maybe at the end of their day, they might think, well, I might die tomorrow or, you know, death is coming and so on.
10:30
And and they might cultivate that particular thought, abstract thought about death being in the future, not in the sense that we're talking about, but being somewhere else at some other point.
Yeah.
Not connected with.
Yeah, not connected with.
10:46
It's like a different thing.
It is, yeah.
Yeah.
They don't see it in the heart of their own present existence.
So a person like that to, if they had to somehow find the effort to do that every day, have those abstract notions of death still might be a bit more careful.
11:04
Yeah, no, sure.
It's better than being completely, like ignorant or like deluded in regard to it, of course.
Like, it's better to not forget that you will die.
Even in that kind of abstract, secondary, remote sense, that usual kind of idea of death is for people.
11:27
It's it's better than nothing.
But like when Buddha was describing the contemplation of that, that that leads to like the quickest way of dispassion and other hardship, it has to be taken very, very differently, much more acutely, much more precisely, and much more profusely.
11:46
If you were thinking about death as an abstract thing in the future coming and your mind becomes more grateful for the present things of life, your mind goes into the direction of the lighting in life, really appreciating all the moments and all the things that can happen.
12:12
I think that is a sign that you're not connecting this, correct?
Yeah, that's very nice.
Well, again, take the simile of the trap.
See if you're contemplating pretty much any contemplation.
Yeah.
Life if it's done acutely.
12:29
Death if it's done acutely.
Trap.
Contemplation of a trap acutely.
You recognize that it's not something that will come later.
It's right there now, as I think it it's hanging over my head.
12:46
Would you then spend time going around saying thank you to other people within the same trap and expressing your gratitude?
You might say it in passing.
If it comes up while you are being preoccupied with how to free myself from the impending thing, that's gonna crash on my head in this trap.
13:05
I'm so grateful for this state.
Exactly.
So even when people contemplate it in that sense you described those people, not everybody, but then that death is still kind of removed.
13:21
So it's like, yes, it's a trap and everything, but the fact that you think you have time to gratitude and sort things out and appreciate things, you wouldn't appreciate stuff if you're aware of the imminent danger of that stuff.
So only when that imminence is removed, you can kind of, OK, let me deal with this, and then I'll deal with it when it comes.
13:42
But it's like recognizing the imminence, the implicit.
This life is the trap.
The life is the death.
The death, you know it cannot have it otherwise.
Impossible.
But it's like the separation because people see it separately.
Yes, the separation because of the accumulated wrong views.
14:01
So they don't see it simultaneously as the counterpart to life is surrounded it's shell.
And they don't see it simultaneously, because seeing things simultaneously requires training against the grain, against the directionality of your senses, of your mind, of everything you know.
14:21
So you can't do it accidentally.
You can't accidentally stumble upon the clear image and relationship between life and death that would result in the immediate dispassion you become an errand.
But you can through repetition and through kind of digging up that way against the grain of your senses, against the grain of life, against that flow of, you know, forward movement, so to speak, that generally it's how people, people's lives go.
14:47
So it takes that effort to swim against the current, and one of the obvious ways of doing that is taking on the precept, celibacy, sense restraint, and then the contemplation of that.
15:04
Like death, however remote, delayed, non imminent might have been, it's going to start narrowing down because you are not maintaining the cover up of the imminent of death through your actions of sensuality or will non restraint you're containing.
15:29
Engagement and you're?
Containing and then you're gonna start discerning it on the right level.
So those who are mindful of death.
Well, that's it.
See, not being forgetful of that context is the beginning of that right mindfulness.
15:47
That's what we said.
Those who are forgetful, I Those who are unmindful, they're as if that already.
And any of those who are mindful have an opportunity have the.
16:03
To yeah, eventually penetrated on that acute level and understand and see it.
They would then result.
Not, as I said, in some magical mystical experience, but in complete dispassion towards anything concerned with life.
Doesn't mean they delight in death either.
16:22
They just mean they contemplated sufficiently enough to to cancel out delight in life, and that's enough for liberation.
So someone gets that context of death, How do they remember it?
16:43
You know, How do you keep it going throughout the day?
Oh, you're gonna be getting it.
You'll be you'll be getting distracted.
You, you, you, you.
You keep yourself from drifting away too far from it by policing and restraining your own actions.
16:59
Which are delighting.
Which would be exactly?
Which would be countering that context of death.
See, if you're acting out of sensuality, you have to put life first.
You have to put the pleasure of life even even more 1st.
And that's already a serious perversion of that actual order.
17:17
And whenever you pervert the order, you cover up what's implicit in that order.
So by by delighting in life, by perpetuating proliferating delight, through acts of sensuality acting out of your will, acting out of hindrances regarding life and things that come up within their life, you are covering up the implication of death in it.
17:43
And every time you cover it up, the view that death is something later gets established more and more.
And if I suppose, you also have to feel that threat.
18:00
Yeah, yeah.
Cuz it's an immediate threat.
It's not.
You certainly would initially.
That's why it's very important.
If you wanna go down this route of contemplating death in similar contexts, you better have your aggregated virtue properly established.
18:18
Because otherwise the mind is just going to start freaking out in regard to everything, because it will realize that there is no shelter up down, above, below, behind, forward, anything in any direction.
I go to seek shelter for myself.
It's under death, it's under the rule of death, it's in death.
18:34
It is implicit.
Thus it's not safe.
So only person they will not be overwhelmed by, that is the person who already contained the mind from spilling over too far in this irrational attempt of seeking, seeking safely that would then result in its own derangement.
Because in a way, so if aggregate of virtue is developed, then even though death is that threat to life, it can.
18:59
Feel as a threat and every but it will be contained, because you have contained that which is under the threat of death.
So although you still have some horses in that race, so to speak, in other words you're not completely fully dispassionate towards life.
19:16
You have contained all those unwholesome ways of making your dependence on that trap even worse.
So when you start recognizing the trap and that which would be destroyed by the trap, you might feel some intensity, but overall it's contained because your actions have been purified beforehand and then you can take it further.
19:40
So a person would feel the threat and freak out only if they haven't contained that.
Yeah, they might like again, whatever that intensity might at the time might feel like the highest intensity because it's not like you can be outside of that experience and compare it, you know, like whatever is the current pain, it's the worst pain in in in everyone's life.
20:01
Whatever's current worry, it's the worst, worst worry.
But whether they're doing it rightly or not, they can see whether how close to the the breaking the precept and acting out they are or not.
Like in hindsight, when they look back week ago when I started contemplating death and so on, yes, we felt close, it felt acute, it felt scary.
20:25
But I haven't done anything on account of it and that will already bring confidence because that's the measure.
Have you done anything on account of it?
And how bad was it?
How bad did your mind make you act?
Good.
Yeah.
So in the face of that felt, I think that's that threat cuz like, well, I can think about death.
20:48
I'm not afraid of death, like many people.
Yeah.
Say when I think about death, I'm not afraid of death.
It's not the death they're thinking about.
Korea when you feel a threat of pain little bit, what do you do?
Well, exactly.
21:04
There.
Sure, sure.
That's like if, if a person wants to contemplate, start contemplating death, If they, say, feel like their virtue is decent, they've been restraining guarding the sense doors.
They're not breaking the precepts, they're not engaging with sensuality, they're celibate and so on, and they want to practice a bit of a sharper approach, such as death contemplation.
21:31
You don't start by your ideas of death.
You just pick up something that's dear to you and imagine it being taken away where that feeling of of pain is.
That's what death is.
So take it and further there and practice this passion towards it.
21:47
Right.
It's also yes.
So finding that those signs of death almost, you know, picking up that that flavor of death in a seeing.
So imagine exactly.
So those flavors are actually to be found in things that you don't, that somebody might not necessarily associate with death with their idea of death.
22:09
They're finally not getting what you want, being paired with what you don't want, being separated from what you want, all these things.
Basically, duca are examples.
Of Duca.
Wherever there is Duca, the direction of Duca, that's what death is.
22:25
So contemplate things that would cause you suffering, and you are contemplating death.
Then you take it further and it's like, yeah, so I would be afraid I would be.
I would be affected.
I would suffer if I lose the loved ones.
22:42
Imagine how much more than so through that same duca of contemplating losing the loved ones.
Imagine losing also these senses on account of which you have your loved ones.
Well, that's gonna feel even worse.
Yeah.
23:01
So imagine those things, contemplate that, but then pick up the sign of death.
Basically, just pick up that.
Feel it.
Feel it.
Feel it.
But again, as I said, only only on the basis of of thoroughly developed virtue, because otherwise I mean this is not something that the Buddha was teaching to householders by householders meaning people.
23:25
They are not celibate people that might occasionally take on virtue and you know, go to monastery and keep a preset for a week or something like.
Because for most, for most, people who love will not be able to love life, love things in life, their families, their children, whatever, getting the flavor of death.
23:47
It means turning away from and forgetting about and everything about it again and just indulging more into life, love, life, even harder because just just cover it up.
And if you had to give such a person the threat of death while they were still delighting so much in that life?
24:05
Well, you get what the Sudan described when they heard a Buddha described Nibana from their standpoint of very much cherishing life, possessions and everything else they would have.
As a Sudan described, they fell on the ground beating their breast, pulling their hair and saying like, oh that will kill us, that will destroy us, yeah.
24:22
There's like people in On Death or in some of these in America, they don't, they're on death row, but they they could be executed any day.
So there's always this threat.
Hanging over their head.
Yeah, and they are not really wanting to be there.
24:37
Yeah.
They would rather not distract themselves from that which they go crazy, you know?
Yeah, it's like the worst kind of.
Well, yeah, that's what.
That's what Dostoevsky was writing about the House of Dead in the prison.
From his experience in the prison, basically he saw that the worst punishment to give to a man that, you know, a man IA householder, that loves life, that does not see the problem in sensuality is to like have a perpetual possibility of execution.
25:08
Like there were people there, they were the same with their death row and they might be killed tomorrow, they might not.
Sometimes they were taken out to the gallows and then sent back and it's like unbearable mentally and they all just disintegrated.
And he was, he was affected by witnessing that Because as that other sort of describes, it's like when the man was talking to the Buddha, you brought it up recently when it said, oh, you know, like we love life, families, centrality, household life, just the idea of renunciation feels like a precipice, feels like falling into the abyss, Just the idea of renunciation.
25:45
It's like if renunciation scares you that much, well, imagine how much forceful renunciation will scare you.
Death.
When, When things are forcefully taken away from you.
When you are, when, when, basically where, where?
Where your own mind does the renunciation for you Like, like without you wanting it.
26:05
When your senses just fail.
So it's like you already get the flavor through practicing renunciation.
That's why it's just generally so scary.
You say to people you gotta be celibate.
It's like like you, you you put on the greatest fear on them.
It's like forever.
26:22
Like I will never experience the pleasure of the senses again.
It's like it's like death from the point of view of those whose minds are still very much imbued with sensuality and do not see danger in that trap.
26:40
But seeing it as danger, no longer delighting in life, which.
Yeah, so like you brought up the example of a person who, say, might experience that flavor and then double down in commitment to their life and loving life and family and so on.
26:56
It's like, so if somebody experienced the flavor of death, gets a hint of it, and they recognize they're not able to dwell on it and contemplate it rightly, at least don't cover it up twice as much as before.
27:14
So allow that kind of background hint of that doubt.
It failed to stay there, OK, you don't have to go fully towards it if you have not prepared the basis of virtuous, sensory trained liberals and so on.
But at least don't cover it up, don't completely cover it up because they were, they were protugeon, they were philosophers, they were religious people.
27:36
They.
Weren't so intoxicated.
Yeah, exactly.
And they were not withdrawn from sensuality and so on.
But they did have the capacity through practice to not completely cover that up and it did shape their life more wholesomely.
It's not ideal because they still stay putugenous.
27:55
But I'm saying is if somebody who also has access to the instruction of the gamma and then practices that non complete cover up of death, well it would certainly bring you even closer to the right view.
And then eventually you realize you might realize that that giving up sensuality is not as scary as you thought it was, and you work up towards it and then and actually start containing your mind on that level where it matters.
28:26
So if you do see it right, death rightly and you start renouncing sensuality, start renouncing the world.
Well, no, you gotta start.
But you might have that.
In the right don't cover it up and then start renouncing.
Yeah, sure.
28:41
Sure, that.
Can be like a wake up call basically.
I'm going to die.
Yeah.
And there's no way I can.
Escape that.
So to speak, so how?
Can you?
How can you escape the implication of manifestation when you yourself, anything you know about yourself?
28:59
Any possession, any ownership, is just another manifestation inconceivable.
So a person who's actually moved by that thought in and starts doing things rightly in accordance with it, starts to do like, yeah, let me stop being a bit careful, let me find an answer to this issue, and then starts to contemplate it more and more and finds himself, you know, virtuous, dispassionate towards life.
29:31
Then as Ed Souter says, you know, either he fully dispassionate towards life or Becker gets established.
So it's not like he's in this paranoid.
No Fear.
Or disgusts and hates everything.
29:46
Exactly that.
They might, you might, you might have episodes of that.
But again, with the right instruction, which is abundant with the sutras and so on, you recognize, OK, no, it's about the whole dwelling on death and recollecting it and not forgetting it is just so to experience, to develop the complete dispassion towards anything concerned with life.
30:09
Just to that extent.
Not more, not less.
OK, when that dispassion is established, you recognize.
OK, so now I neither delight in that life nor do I delight in death.
Certainly don't fear it, cuz I have nothing to lose anymore.
Whatever is here will have to not be here, because it's here for no other reason.
30:30
But seeing life, seeing it correctly, that you will see well, you're basically contemplating in each of their life counterpart death.
Oh yeah, of course you just.
And the realization it's not mine.
30:47
This is never was mine.
Well.
Exactly through this passion cuz passion maintains the ownership.
Acting out of passion maintains the ownership.
Possession, consumption, all these all these notion, all these phenomena.
It's just how you maintain the ownership.
The ownership.
When you realize that when you start contemplating and establish the context, that's that's incompatible with the growth of passion towards things, The mind just can't go in that direction because of the whole framework of death that's being seen in regard to it.
31:16
Like you go and reach this fruit to eat it easily, you enjoy it.
Well then you suddenly recognize through discernment that there is a massive axe waiting to chop your hand Each time you reach for the fruit.
The significance, the joy of the fruit very much changes.
31:34
It becomes actually dangerous.
So the taste hasn't changed.
It all remained the same.
It still tastes the same, the greatest fruit ever known to man.
But now you see an axe waiting to fall and it's like, it's not the same thing anymore, isn't it?
31:51
So the mind will not go and just, Oh yeah, you give me that fruit, let me reach for it because it sees what's implicit.
And you contemplate it long enough, it will stop being scary because you recognize, well, there's nothing scary about an axe hanging over a random fruit.
32:07
It becomes scary when my hand is in between the two or my head.
So now when you recognize the danger, you don't have to well, you have to practice sensory strain because of the habits.
But when that's been thoroughly done, you don't have to then stop yourself from reaching.
32:26
Just by having that context means mind will not be reaching.
That's why the you would have said one Whatever you frequently think and ponder, that's what will become the inclination of your mind.
So you're frequently pondering about the taste of the fruit and how great it is in the texture.
32:42
Well, the mind isn't losing its broader context, and it's becoming more obsessed and focused on the aspect of the taste.
The beauty.
The beauty exactly.
And but if you frequently contemplate the hanging X, well then the mind is is is is inclining towards avoiding that danger cuz it's actually dangerous.
33:03
So then a restraint becomes effortless.
You don't need to restrain yourself cuz you don't want to do it in the first place.