0:02
So we're going to go through Majumanikaya #2 now, which is Sabasava Sutta translated as all the defilements.
So the sutta begins by saying the Buddha was staying near Savati in Jettah's Grove and he addressed the monks.
0:27
Saying monks, I will teach you the explanation of the restraint of all defilements.
Listen and apply your mind well.
I will speak and the Buddha continues, monks, I say that the ending of defilements is for the one who knows and sees, not for the one who does not know or see, for one who knows and sees what.
0:52
Attention through source and attention through not source.
When you attend, not through the source, defilements arise.
Once arisen, they grow.
When you attend through the source, defilements don't arise, and those that have already arisen are given up dispelled.
1:10
Some defilements should be given up by seeing, some by restraint, some by using, and some by bearing, some by avoiding, and some by dispelling, and some by developing.
So let's go to the beginning of this, where it says, monks, I say that the ending of the filements is for the one who knows and sees, not for the one who doesn't know or see.
1:33
So this statement means that the teaching that's about to follow the instructions he's about to give apply to somebody who already has the right view, so at least assault upon him.
So the one who sees, knows and sees the way out of suffering, not the one who doesn't know and see way out of suffering.
1:54
In other words, if a person without a right view were to then just try and do and bear things or develop things and all these other things that the Buddha will describe once you do in the sutta, it simply won't take place because they're missing the prerequisite for it.
2:13
Prerequisite for it is, as it says, as you continues here, for one who who knows and sees what.
So what is it that distinguishes a sort of partner from a protuja?
Now what is?
What is that necessary prerequisite that then makes the rest of this, the rest of the suit apply?
There is attention through the source and attention not through the source.
2:32
Or as as we probably people that follow this channel, they already know the term Pali term is yoniso manasikara and ioniso manasikara.
We translated that in the past as concurrent attention, root attention, attention with the source basically yoniso manasikara.
2:52
It's it's it's like 50% of the right view.
Let's put it that way in in the suitor where the Buddha describes that, there are two factors that for the rising of the right view, one is utterance of another.
3:07
In other words, one is correct instruction, another one is Jonas Suman Sikar.
So you could be talking to the Buddha himself and he can be giving you the most correct, the most accurate instruction.
You won't be understanding it if Yoni Suman a secara is not developed.
3:29
Now.
Yoni Suman a secara, Yoni Suman, womb, Mana secara means attention, so womb attention, the source, the origin.
Attention like that has been translated in many different ways.
And so the point is, like you, you know, the common translation is like a wise reflection or wise attention, implying it's something a person can just do after some serious consideration.
3:56
And you can take it to mean that.
But then you should ask yourself, OK, so if I have Yoni Suman Sicara according to the meaning of wise consideration, for example.
So I am wisely considering things and I got the right instruction, all the Sutas, all the all the Nikayas, why am I not having the right view?
4:16
Because these are the two only factors for the right view.
If Yoni Suman Sicara meets the right instruction, right view has to take place.
So then if a person is honest, they would ask themselves, oh, well, they would inquire further and recognize that, OK, so it's either not the right instruction or perhaps my understanding of the first factor of Yoni Sumani Sicara, it's not adequate.
4:40
And that's the problem.
Like these things that we would often say, oh, it's wrong, it's a wrong translation itself.
It's not that they're completely wrong.
So it's it's nothing wrong in saying only sumanasikara is wise consideration, because you only sumanasikara implies wise consideration.
4:57
But if if it's limited just to the concept of wise consideration, you won't look further, you won't make it even more significant and profound.
Which is obviously necessary because as as the suitor says, as the other suitors say, the Yoni Sumanasikara instruction of another means the right view.
5:19
There is no third option there.
So if there is no right view upon meeting the teaching, it's either because the teaching is either wrong or you don't have Yoni Sumanasikara.
You need to revise and reconsider ironically what Yoni Sumanasikara means and how deep that goes.
5:38
So that's why the insistence in what I was translating in the past is calling it concurrent attention.
It's just it is really more like just to kind of snap people out of that slumber of taking for granted.
Oh yeah, wise, reflection, wise consideration, I got that, I understand that, while at the same time knowing that they don't have the right view.
5:58
So if you say it's a concurrent attention or attention with the source, it's kind of, it's confusing and that's already a good starting point.
Like you won't be taking it for granted, you will take it as something that needs to be clarified and understood.
So attention through the source in in this translation that we chose and attention not through the source.
6:22
So you might wonder then what what source is it like?
Some sort of mystical source And and what what source does that refer to?
What is it?
So think about it.
I mean we did a whole like I don't know how many talks on Yoni Suman Sicara and we can probably link them here in the description.
6:44
So people should like if they want to understand it or or get a bigger wider picture on on on the indication of what it actually means.
They should definitely listen to those talks.
So like in brief, here, now, without going into the they can this whole talk, just the discussion of you only saw attention with the source or through the source.
7:04
Even better, again implies the simultaneous presence of, say, that which you're attending.
Whatever there might be particular general, internal, external or personal, not personal.
It doesn't matter.
Whatever your current mind, currently your mind is occupied with attending at attending to, simultaneous to that, there is a simultaneous presence of a necessary basis for that.
7:33
So whatever you were doing, whatever action you're engaged with, like your attention naturally goes with that direction and and falls into what you are doing.
So the the the content of what you're doing.
So that's why like the the sensuality is one of the chief examples of Ione Somana Sikarov attending not through the source, so not with the source simultaneously recognized.
7:57
There you you get overly concerned, overly invested, overly concentrated onto the objects of your senses, as opposed to not losing the sight, not losing the context, the perspective of whatever you are attending through your senses, the necessary basis, the source of that whole attending to this particular thing that arose on account of my sight.
8:25
The necessary basis is simultaneously presence there as a necessary basis.
If that basis is removed, if that source is taken away, no experience standing upon it can remain and that is a recognition that protrusion that can develop can develop if he goes in that direction of of yoniso, which obviously he has to if he wants to get the right view.
8:47
So in the, in the more like in practical examples, the source is like well, you could say like for example if it's if it's the essential object you're looking at the necessary source that simultaneously present present there it's.
9:02
You could, you could describe it as it's the necessity of the body, more specifically necessity of the eye organs, which is the basis, the field for which on which these things can be discerned.
Now people forget that people don't think about their eyes when they're preoccupied with a lustful sight or even disagreeable sight.
9:22
They they they they look past the experience right here.
So in like when you're experiencing sight, sound, smell, taste, touches, you're experiencing your senses experiencing sight, sound, smell, taste touches.
But those senses as an underlying basis are overlooked.
9:41
People see site sounds melted touches directly, or they assume it's a direct connection, direct perception of site sounds, melted touches over there in the world.
Yet really the closest to the direct connection is just you being aware of what your senses are perceiving without seeing the senses overlooking the source.
10:00
So when you attend to the sense objects, you don't attend through the necessary basis of those sense objects.
You completely ignore it.
You're unaware of it.
That's the point.
So it's discerning that which is seemingly invisible.
Your eye is invisible in your sights, yet is a necessary basis for sites to exist.
10:21
So not losing the context of the necessity of the eyes when you are looking at the sites is already close to Yonisa Yonisa Manasikara.
So you might still be attending to the sense objects, but not at the expense of ignoring the necessary basis for the sense objects.
10:37
You can go even further.
You can discern the yoniso manasikara of your current currently currently performed action.
So let's say you are engaged in some action.
Say you're writing something.
You're writing a letter as an example, intention to write a letter that binds all these acts of getting the paper, taking the pen, opening the paper, writing down the sentences, ideas, what you want to say, that whole thing, it's all contained within, still having the intention to finish, to write and complete this letter.
11:12
Because if halfway through that letter intention to not write a letter, the state of mind changes, you stop writing the letter.
And that's another thing that the people would overlook, ignore or be unaware of.
When they act, they don't see their intentions that are behind those actions, giving the meaning to all the subsequent particular things you do to complete that action.
11:35
They remain unified with your original intention.
That intention doesn't go away.
It's not sitting there in the past.
It's carried through by all these actions that you are engaging with.
So these are the examples of discerning through the source.
Now that in and of itself will not give rise to the to the right view if you just discerning through the source, obviously would give rise to some degree of wisdom and some degree of withdrawal from being overly absorbed in sense objects.
12:02
But it won't give rise to the right view and even in and of itself.
But if somebody does have that way of attending, not overlooking a a a degree that's hiding there in the middle, like your eyes are hiding between oh me here and looking at things over there that you just assume.
And so if you, if you have developed that recognition and you get the right instruction that points at that middle way, the the the utterance of another, the right view is inevitable, it cannot not occur.
12:31
That's the point.
So, and that's exactly why the Buddha describes it here.
He said like the ending of the development.
So basically, the deliberation from suffering is for the one who knows and sees, not for the one who doesn't know and see, know and see what.
That middle ground, that which is usually invisible in people's actions, in people's perception of of, of site, sounds, melted, touches, stuff that they overlook, stuff that they need to they need to be pointed at in order to start to discern it, the necessary basis of certain things.
13:02
Even again, you will never be able to see your eyes, yet you can hammer in like on the individual basis of every perception, and in general that it's impossible.
It will be impossible to see if eye organs stop working.
It's just inconceivable.
13:19
So simply that which starts as an abstract thought of all my eye organs are because of which I'm seeing this start including into every time you're engaged with sights, sound, smell, taste, touches respective organs.
He will not be able to be to experience the any kind of sense of touch, presence of the body here.
13:39
Now if there is not that living physical body over there simultaneously existing or over here, you can say it.
So the point is not to to to to try to attend to what that source might be, because that would be on the level of already attending to the objects of your senses, including mentally.
13:59
The point is to discern the necessity of the source while your attention is resting on this or that.
So that's how.
That's why sense restraint is necessary to just force you to withdraw from the dependence on the sense objects and the degree that your mind kind of is engaged with.
14:17
And once you have withdrawn from that overly proliferated dependence on the sense object, you actually then get to, well, you could.
There is at least some possibility that then you get to discern necessity of the phenomenon of the living eyes that exists simultaneous to the things I'm seeing and I'm engaged with.
14:35
So just to that degree you don't need to then seek and find out what those eyes really are.
You want what those eyes really are.
Is that an invisible aspect that's simultaneously present in the opposite direction of whatever you are currently attending?
14:51
In the nutshell that you only saw and you could see?
OK, you could still take it to mean wise reflection, but what if you take it to me something to mean something as deep as I just described?
Something as hard to see as I just described?
Is it really far fetched then, Then taking it to mean in such manner Plus instruction of another?
15:14
Oh yeah, Then the right view is certainly more possible.
It certainly makes even more sense.
Like, if you are already discerning, already undermining everything you see here.
Smell, taste, touch, think.
For that matter, everything you do, you're undermining by recognition of the necessary basis for it.
15:34
That cannot be yours.
At the same time, that's not yours that has its own feel, that has its own existence, that has its own course, that has its own characteristics, then you recognize, oh OK, if I start seeing my whole experience undermining that manner and I get the right instruction of where the duca is, it's it's, it's very likely I will be able to understand it.
15:58
But if I remain just regarding reading the suit, I'm thinking you only.
So it's just that wise reflection.
Just sit down and consider things before you do them, which is nice.
Nobody denies that.
But it's not deep enough.
He does not undermine your sense of presence here and now enough for the DAMA to apply.
16:18
So that's that's kind of the point and often we'll come across that, especially if we go through these Suda studies.
It's not like that common translations are wrong.
It's just they're not accurate enough.
Like and you could see like say, if you if you are rightly considering the necessary basis, the necessity of the organs living, functioning organs of your eyes simultaneously present while you're looking at this thing.
16:44
Now any last, any aversion, whatever might be that level of engagement will be bracketed, will be put second to the necessary basis for it.
That's why it's like eye organ sites or anything in between.
As the suit is often described, he experienced dispassion towards because it's undermined, rightly so.
17:03
When and whenever there is absence, whenever there is lost, aversion, delusion, undermined, there is a rising of wisdom.
So you could see that if you take yoniso to mean this what we are just what I'm describing here and now, now it's like, Oh yeah, that includes wise reflection for sure.
Like you cannot unwisely reflect unwisely while you're simultaneously undermining your last version, loss of perspective with the right order.
17:27
So if there is no last if, or if it is diminishing or last diminishing of version diminishing of the illusion, there is pretty much none.
There's an increase in the right perspective.
So if you're not lustful, you're less likely.
17:43
Well, if you're not lustful, you will not be unreasonable.
Whenever people are unreasonable, whenever they lose context, lose perspective.
It's a kind of last version of delusion.
There's no other option there.
So if you take your to mean this and then work towards understanding it, then you will need very little instruction to apply, because this is already 50% of the work and that's exactly why it's so important.
18:10
And the whole suite starts with that ending of suffering.
Ending of defilements is for the one who sees, not for the one who doesn't see.
It doesn't see what Yoni Suman Sicara and Ioni Suman Sicara.
He sees the degree, he sees the extent, He sees that simultaneous relationship and then continues.
18:31
So when you attend not through the source defilements, degree diversion, delusion increase and once arisen they grow.
When you attend through the source, defilements don't arise, and once arisen they diminish.
And that that's actually in another suit.
18:48
Where the Buddha talks about hindrances, where people commonly think hindrances, you deal with hindrances by countering them by doing this, when this hindrance is present, when doing that, when this hindrance is present.
But actually the whole suta sums up the whole 5 hindrances.
You deal with them by seeing through them with the only Summoner Sicara.
19:05
So that's the point.
See, Yoni Sumanasika is a factor that Protuja can develop with the right instruction from another he can become a sodepaner and that Yoni Sumanisika doesn't.
It's not finished.
The entire like development of that practice that follows for us from a sodepaner to another hunt, is just done through expanding the Yoni Sumanasikaara until there is no part of your experience, no part of your aggregates, that you could possibly attend wrongly with ioniso.
19:37
So that habit of seeing with yoniso is is is is thoroughly has thoroughly permeated all the aspects of your experience.
Even like the five hindrances abandoning them, you abandon them by seeing through them.
So by seeing their source, the necessary present basis of an arisen sensuality, you see it as a necessary present basis of a reason suba image.
20:03
Picture of beautiful, image of beautiful, notion of beautiful that you haven't undermined.
You undermine it there and then that which was the hindrance remains you become unhindered by it and it goes on for all the other.
We'll come to that Suta at some point and obviously I'll I'll, I'll I'll reference it here.
20:22
But the point is that and in other Suta yes actually would have said there is not a single thing that makes centrality makes the recent centrality increase non reason sensuality arise such as ionism and there is not a single thing in the world that makes the reason sensuality diminish and non reason sensuality not arise as yonisum and sicara.
20:47
So learning how to undermine things rightly to attending with the source.
In other words, whatever you're attending, you're discerning the source present there simultaneously with it is the way they would feel, not just from sensuality, but from the hindrances and from all the defilements.
21:02
And this sorta just confirms that, because when the Buddha describes these types of defilements, and then we go now to the first defilement, which is defilement to be given up by seeing.
So it says what are the defilements that should be given up by seeing?
Take an untrained, ordinary person with neither skill nor training.
21:21
The teaching of the noble ones hasn't seen them, has not discerned it.
They have not seen the true person.
In other words, they don't have the right instruction.
They don't have you.
They don't.
They don't understand.
They don't see for themselves internally, intimately.
They don't see which things they should attend like which things they should allow their attention to rest on, and which things they should not allow their attention to rest on.
21:46
So in order to see which things you should allow your attention to rest on, and which things are unsuitable for attention, you need to become assault upon at first.
So Protujuna cannot discern that.
So they attend things they shouldn't, and they don't attend things they should.
They don't know where the emphasis is, as I often say.
22:04
So there and then explains what are those things that they attended they shouldn't.
Well, they're things that when attended to give rise to unreasoned definements and make the reason definements grow.
Definements essential desire definements of being, Bava and ignorance.
22:21
So they are things that they attend, but they shouldn't.
So it's they're attending them and the way they're attending them that's another mistake.
And then there are things that if you stop attending in that wrong way, they will not give rise to, to unreason unwholesome and things in defilements.
22:39
So if you don't attend sensual desire, if you don't attend being wrongly, if you don't attend ignorance, those things will not increase.
But in order to know that in order to discern those things, you already need to have the right view and you already need to have your obviously.
22:59
So, having not knowing protujun are not knowing what should he attend.
He attends to things.
He attends to unsuitable things.
He attends to suitable things wrongly.
He basically he doesn't know where the measure is.
So when they're not attending through the source Ioniso manasi karoti, then the questions such as did I exist in the past?
23:26
Did I not exist in the past?
Was I in the past?
How was I in the past?
After being what?
What did I become?
The questions about the future will exist in the future.
Will I not exist in the future?
What will be the future?
How will I be in the future After being what?
What will I become or there undecided about the present?
23:45
Am I?
Am I not?
What am I?
How am I?
Is everything in Icha or this is an nature that is really an arta?
This is an arta, everything is an Arta, the Buddha said.
But fundamentally they don't see that for themselves.
So it's all just on the level of concerned guesswork, so to speak.
And that's all the result of cultivating Ayony samanasikara, of not seeing things through the source that they have arisen.
24:10
And by doing so, by doing so, yes, by doing the the Ayony Samanasikara, you of course inevitably inadvertently put yourself as the center of the experience.
That's what's emphasized, me seeing, me hearing and so on.
And that's that's pretty much that root of ownership and root all the problems.
24:29
So then, through continuing such ways of thinking and emphasizing things wrongly, the natural questions, the natural concerns of the protugeon, that would be where did I come from?
Where will I go?
All these insecurities that revolve around me and my placement and my security.
24:48
And even if they don't think about the past or don't think about the future presently, they will be unclear and undecided.
In other words, they will still hold on to that view of themselves as the center of the experience because they haven't undermined the center of the experience sufficiently enough.
So that's what I said.
25:05
If you stop attending wrongly to last, to to aversion to being, to delusion, to ownership, to all these things, this will diminish, even if you're still putogenous.
Even if you still hold a self view to some degree, if you haven't heard the Buddhist teaching, if you don't know, don't know the way out of the duca.
25:25
By not attending wrongly to all these things that should not be attended to wrongly, these views will diminish and you will not have the pressure in question of where am I heading, what will I be?
What's my future You know will have be liberated.
25:40
All these these anxious kind of things that concern oneself deeply so And then it says so if they continue.
When they don't so.
When they're when they're attending to things wrongly do not discern yoniso and keep attending to things I with ioniso monacicara without the source so to speak.
25:59
Without the recognition of the source And then they continue engaging with such questions was in the past what was how did this come to be and oh what's some Sara and how did you originate where we are heading all that kind of these answers that people seek to basically provide a sense of clarity and security for their concern about their future selves.
26:21
Where will I end up?
What will happen to me?
Will it go up or down?
You know all these anxious things that will kind of arise at some point.
See if a person continues doing that and tries seeking answer on that level already on the basis of all the wrong assumption.
And I only so.
The Buddha says when they attend not through the source.
26:40
In this way one of the following six views arises for them.
There is myself, there is not myself.
I perceive self.
The self with the self.
I perceive the not self with the self.
I perceive the self with what is not self.
26:57
What view cannot arise in them is, I perceive not self with not self, because for that they need to have had undermine their experience sufficiently enough through Yonisumana sikara.
So that's why often you have people talk about, Oh yes, you know the the modern science has proven the Buddha as well that everything is impermanent, that's nothing is real.
27:19
That's very much the wrong view.
Like it's not a question that things are not real.
The question is that things are not yours even if you want them to be So the sense of self, the center of experience that you are, you can deny you can say, well this sense of self is just composed out of atoms and chemicals in this body and thus it's not mine.
27:41
But you still see that not self that you described through your sense of self because there is Ionis or other way around.
Through the sense of not self, you see self either permutation.
Whichever way you reflect back, there's gonna be a sense of self hiding there or implicit there cuz you can't just willingly step outside of it, you can only undermine it through your and the right instruction.
28:06
So it's not incidental that these 6 views.
There is self or there is no self which you say, which you perceive which is sent to self.
I perceive the self with self.
There is self on every level.
No, no some things are not self, some things are self.
This is not myself.
Yesterday was myself, today is not myself.
28:24
Either way, past, future, present, in personal or impersonal, there's gonna be self hiding at some level.
In other words, wrong emphasis would be hiding at some level.
But it's not incidental that within this 6 views.
So these are the five.
And then the 6th view is the self of mine.
28:43
Is he the speaker, the knower who experiences the result of good, bad?
And again, this is like obviously a template phrase, but you could read the subtle thing into and recognize it.
You know, when people say, Oh yeah, nothing's real, everything is an author.
There is just the knowing of the experience.
28:59
It's just the know where the the pure consciousness, the eternal cheat, all these things that people say, all those things are personified to that extent.
All of those things is now what their self has become.
And where it is hiding doesn't matter how you rebrand it or how you call it.
If you are giving an entity A phenomenon, superior position, from which the knowing happens in perception and liberation and eternal freedom, that entity is going to be your sense of self, because that's what you start with.
29:28
So the question is not finding the Super special thing that can be a sense of self.
That's an author and it's free from everything.
The question is undermining everything until you can't hold on to things even if you want to.
So that's why nobody can do the practice of the right view accidentally, because it goes against the entire being that you are, against the grain of it, against everything that that your inclination would go.
29:52
You have to swim against them, swim against the stream, as the Buddha described.
But the point is, you can't do that accidentally.
You have to have had some sort of faith in some sort of instruction that is now making you constantly undermine your experience to seeing the necessary present source here and now.
30:10
And by doing so, to that extent, make yourself unable to own or assume the ownership or appropriate things that you're perceiving like your senses see, by being, by overlooking your eyes and being engaged with the sight, the lighting in it, relishing it, you have appropriated your eyes simply by not seeing that as a necessary basis over there, independent of of your seeing, so to speak.
30:34
Independent in a sense of it's not in your control.
So it's not incidental that these views do not allow for somebody to perceive not self with not self top to bottom, to be free from the atavada from the self view.
Because for that they need to have had stopped attending to these things with Ionis.
30:52
So and in order to do that they need to have had been sufficiently restrained withdrawn, so they're not giving the the attention to things they shouldn't be giving.
And and then the Buddha concludes this by saying, This is called going into views, thicket views, a desert of views, a contortion of views affected of views, arriving of views, and then being feted by these views.
31:21
An untrained ordinary person is not freed from birth, old age, death, sorrow, limitation, pain, sadness and distress.
They are not free from suffering.
I say now take the train over disciple, the one with the right view.
They understand for themselves which things they should attend and which things they should not attend, and they understand the things that they shouldn't attend is the one that make the definements arise and non reason manifest, and the reason one grow, such as sensuality being an ignorance.
31:51
So it repeats this.
And then they understand that the things that they are, if they are attended to, they don't give rise to these unwholesome states, so then they stick to it.
They don't attend to things they shouldn't and attend to.
They think the things they should.
So then there are unreason defilements don't arise, and those defilements that are reason they given up, they attend through the source.
32:12
In other words, they recognize the nature of the situation here and now.
See when you attend through the source of the necessity of the eye organs for your sites, or just take over a necessity of this physical lamp of flesh which is the body for your experience as a whole.
32:34
It's a necessary basis while you're attending particular aspect of the aspect of the experience as a whole.
Well, when you're attending to that, with the right instruction, you get to recognize the certain characteristic of that necessary basis of that condition of those I organs or the body as a whole, which is it's impermanent, it's not pleasurable, being paired with a moving vehicle that you have no control over its directions.
33:05
It's actually when you recognize, oh, this is uneasy, this this cannot be any pleasure.
Experience is contingent to the fact that this vehicle is still moving in the direction that can lead to my tremendous paddle.
So simple recognition of an own ability of the body on that yoniso level.
33:25
Not like, oh, this is not mine.
This is not mine.
This is an honorable no, no.
Seeing it as a necessary basis for attending to it, even if it's the same body or attending that necessary basis, is unownable.
That source is unownable.
That source, thus, because it's unknownable, came on its own.
33:42
It's subject to its own directions.
Inconceivable doesn't see you.
You don't exist for it, thus it cannot be in your possession eternally.
It cannot remain unchanged internally, and that all becomes implicit.
So that's why when I saw the Banner who has stopped attending to wrong things, who has developed Yoni Sumone Sicara, who has received instruction of what to look for in terms of suffering, he recognizes when he attends through the source key recognize this is the suffering, This is the origin of suffering.
34:13
This will be the ending of that suffering.
And this is the practice that would cement that cessation of that suffering.
They would cement that freedom because that's exactly where the suffering is.
It's not in this or this site Sounds Maltese touches past future.
No, no, no.
It's the in the perpetual relationship between the necessary basis and your life and things you're engaged with, with the necessary basis of that source and things you're attending through that.
34:38
Well, with or without that recognition of that source, that's what the suffering is.
Once he recognizes that all the concerns about past, future, who he was, what will be where he's heading, it's all diminished.
So when somebody recognizes the relationship between the source and thinks they're attending at the same time that is the source of their experience of attending to this thing or that thing.
35:00
They have recognized the DAMA.
And by by doing so, they give up the three factors.
As the suitor describes, they give the ownership view, Sakai, deity or personality view, depending on what translation you look at.
They give doubt and they give grasping of the virtues and virtual practices or holding on to still about the Paramus.
35:21
We have other talks on that as well, maybe we'll link that too.
Basically, they give a wrong view of there is a self that's the center of the experience, independent of these aggregates, independent of such melting starches that perceives smells, tastes, and so on.
They give up doubt in regard to what the origin is, what the actual source is.
35:44
They can still doubt mundane stuff, but they can't doubt the presence of the source while they're doubting, so that's why it becomes inaccessible to doubt.
See, when you're in the experience of doubting you're attending to your doubt.
There is the present source enduring as a necessary basis for you to be engaged in the experience of doubt.
36:00
It is real as such, and they have thoroughly discerned that, and that's inaccessible to doubt, as the suitors would describe that.
And so they give a doubt and then they give up the dependence, the sense, the view of duty, that the practices on the level of external mechanical things that come through your sense objects.
36:20
Or by doing this, by doing that, by holding on to this, by believing that.
So techniques, methods, external authorities, all that is given up because that's never where the practice was, and that's never where the suffering was.
36:38
So then #2, now #2 are the definements to be given up by restraint.
And the word for restraint is samvada, kept in track, basically restrained.
36:53
So take among who reflecting through the source.
So Patty Sanka yoniso he lives restraining the faculty of the eye.
So in other words reflecting through the source it's like broadening of your yoni suman sicara.
It's like increasing the basis.
37:10
So it's a practice.
So you have yoni.
So you see the necessary source and now you are you are increasing that basis of that source so that you don't actively have to keep reminding yourself but it stays there as a context.
So being established in such habit of reflecting through yoni somonicicara or with yoni somonicara, he lives restraining the faculty of the eye.
37:35
So he restrains his eyes from seeing things that would give rise to lust and so on, even before he sees them.
Because he recognizes that distressing and feverish defilement that might arise in someone who lives without the restraint will not arise in me if I live with the restraint.
37:55
So he's already undermined, unwholesome, he recognized and also he's undermined on the level of the view.
But now he needs to practically practice engage with preventing his eyes from going back to these the remnants of these old habits of seeking pleasure, insights and forgetting about the necessary basis of the living body, the souls.
38:13
That's UN honorable, that's that's danger, that's paralleled, it's like a chopping block, not forgetting that is then maintained simply to not allowing your eyes to distract themselves.
That's in the nutshell, the purpose of the restraint.
You start doing it externally, so that then becomes this internal criteria of yoni somonisica is developed.
38:32
And then you maintain that simply through not allowing your eyes to look at things that they shouldn't.
So it becomes like an effortless maintenance and development of yoni somonisica, which means it becomes like the effortless development of the path simply through not doing certain things, not letting your eyes look at unwholesome sights.
38:52
And same goes like reflected resource restraining the restraining the faculty of ear, nose, tongue, body and the mind.
And these are the defilements that should be given up by restraint.
So obviously somebody without say a ptugenia without yoni somena sicara, if he practices restraint he will he will also not give rise to these states that would beset the mind with defilements and so on.
39:18
But in and of itself that restraint will not bring yoniso mana sikara to to increase and become fortified because they haven't developed that.
So you should still practice sensor strain even if you were not a sort of banner, because that can help you develop yoniso mana sikara.
39:34
But this practice here it's done through yoniso mana sikara, which is why in return it feeds it.
That's what I mean.
Like by simply not engaging with unwholed in site sounds, melted touches, once yoniso is developed.
So a certain a whole, a whole layer for the lack of better word of defilements, are simply given up through restraint.
39:54
That's it for the one with the right view, not for the one without the right view.
I'll keep repeating that #3 defilements given up by using.
So what are those defilements?
Well, take a monk who, reflecting through the source, makes use of ropes only for the sake of wording, of cold, heat, touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, reptiles.
40:17
For covering up the private parts, reflecting through the source, he makes the use of alms food.
Not for fun, not for adornment, not for decoration, but only to sustain the body, avoid the harm, support the the the spiritual practice, avoid illness and stuff like that.
So in this way I should put an end to all discomfort, not give rise to new discomfort, and I will live blamelessly.
40:36
And it is reflecting through the source.
He makes the use of lodgings for the sake of wording, of cold, heat, touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, sun, reptiles from harsh weather and to enjoy the treat, seclusion, reflecting through the source.
He makes use the medicines and supplies for the sick only for the sake of worrying of the pains of illness and promote good health.
40:56
For the distressing and feverish definements might arise in someone who lives without using these things.
They do not arise when they use rightly so.
In this case again it's certain necessities such as shelter, food, clothes, medicines, even those things are not taken for granted like oh, I must do this because illness is bad.
41:17
Yes, illness is bad, illness will prevent you.
But any any engagement with doing, with taking medicine or having a shelter or looking for a shelter or looking for robes is always maintained, kept in check through maintaining, through reflecting through the source, in this case source being the wholesome context, the necessary context that's practically relevant for your practice.
41:46
So he seeks the lodgings with the seeking of the lodging, is is informed, is, is, is decided upon if the criteria are met that are suitable for practice, not the criteria that come out of one's preference or one's habits.
42:04
So it's like what do I need for practice?
Well, I need shelter from, from the elements, from the cold.
I need not overly exposed and it's occlusion.
And then you seek a place that meets that and that's it.
You don't go further because the need has been met.
And and again, that's what I was saying in the beginning.
42:21
Like one of the ways of discerning your dissemination car is through your engagement with things and why you're doing them.
So if you are eating, why are you eating?
If you don't ask that question yourself, you'll be eating for the wrong reasons because that's how we all start.
So you need to actively keep re re retraining your own intention.
42:42
In other words, yes you can ignore that.
Ignore the the necessity of food for practice and need just because of pleasure or because of boredom or because of whatever else.
Or you can make the effort hold on.
No, no, no.
I will recollect and frequently ponder and maintain the context that food is only so that I can practice ending of suffering.
43:05
That's it.
That's my I will allow myself only to that extent to engage with the with the food.
So then see when you're choosing what to eat without losing that context that yoni saw that source of your action of eating.
It will be much less likely that you will be choosing solely based on the preference.
43:24
You'll be choosing more like what will last the longest, what will keep me the fullest for the smallest amount, what will not make me feel heavy and sluggish and sleepy, but what will provide the necessary nutrients so that and you have to maintain it every time you eat.
43:40
You mustn't lose perspective.
So if every time you eat, every time you wear clothes, every time you engage with the shelter or seek shelter or live in a shelter, you don't lose the context of why this environment is as such and what is its purpose.
And if, if a monk with the right view practices that a whole layer of definements will be abandoned, simple account of that, then definements to be given by bearing, so by putting up.
44:08
So take monks who, reflected through the source, bears cold, heat, hunger, thirst, bears a touch of flies, mosquitoes, wind, reptiles.
He bears rude and unwelcome criticism.
He puts up with physical pain, sharp, severe, acute, unpleasant, disagreeable, life threatening.
44:24
So in other words, a degree of discomfort has to be experienced.
Sooner or later it will come and see.
If there are no flies and mosquitoes and you live in a comfortable environment.
Well, there is the rude words and unwelcome criticism, people talking badly about you.
44:41
See, it's on the level of you have to put up with it through the Yonis, through the just so when the experience of the bad world is present, you don't try to counterly defend yourself, show that they are wrong and so on.
No, no, no, You need to develop yonis in regard to it.
44:57
That's how you deal with it.
So you bear it so that you can see the source of it and but if you just do that to that extent, even if you don't have to seek out the actual physical discomfort, sooner or later they will come.
Obviously, simply thinking what somebody said about you that you didn't like, somebody might say, somebody is saying you already recognize, see, there is the gratuitous resistance to that discomfort of words of another, of too much coal, too cold, too hot, insects biting.
45:30
It's all on the same level.
So how do I deal with it?
By bearing So by not acting out of it, By seeing through it, discerning the source of it.
So when those things are present, you're not attending to who said what you're allowing that to be, while you're attending to the source of it correctly.
45:47
And if you do that, the whole set of definements, the whole layer of them, will be given up simply by bearing them with the right view, not without it.
The farm is given up by avoiding.
So what are the farmers one should give up by avoiding?
46:04
Well, take a monk who, reflecting through the source, avoids a wild elephant, a wild horse, a wild ox, wild dog, a snake, a stump throw on the ground, a pit, Cliff, swamp, or a sewer reflecting through the source.
He avoids sitting on inappropriate seats, walking inappropriate neighborhoods, mixing with bad friends.
46:23
So this is again, somebody who has the right view, recognizes that they still have work to do, they're still not another hunt.
So it's wise for them, even if it's out of fear or or distress, to to avoid a murderer, avoid where wild elephants might kill you.
46:40
Yes, there is a degree.
Oh, I'm afraid I'm affected by this.
I shouldn't be affected by this, that's correct.
But the way to not be affected by this to become another hunt.
In order to become another hunt, you'll need time because it needs to be developed.
And in order to have time, you need to not be killed there and then.
So avoiding things that will end your life here and now while at the same time, because at the same time you recognize that you have not completed the work.
47:04
So let me complete the work free from this imminent danger.
And then when imminent danger comes and you're another hunt, well, you might decide not to move if there is a Wilder.
Doesn't matter the the follow up, the next part of the continues reflecting through the source here voice sitting in in inappropriate seats, inappropriate neighborhoods, mixing with bad friends.
47:22
This refers to.
And again even protuja can practice this to a degree.
This refers to like not putting yourself in the situation or situations that can then compromise your sense restraint and your presets.
47:37
So in this particular these refers to among So avoiding inappropriate seats would be secluded seats with a female present that then can give rise to either things being said out of last or done out of last.
They wouldn't have even been possible.
No matter, even if he wasn't an out of hunter free from sensuality, if he didn't even sit in that inappropriate, secluded, hidden seat, private seat, that if he didn't even sit there, no subsequent things would have taken place.
48:05
So somebody recognizes that I won't even put myself in that position, and then I'll have nothing to deal with it.
In other words, I will not have broken the rules, compromise the sense restraint and everything else that could possibly follow for somebody who's not completely free.
So through rightly reflecting, there is still work to be done.
48:23
He avoids it.
He's not like, yeah, but you know, I'm beyond this.
I should be able to sit that and so on.
When you complete the work.
You might, but then you won't be doing it for those reasons.
And certainly those possibilities of breaking the precept, losing the sense restraint, would not be there as options.
Same walking in appropriate neighborhoods, mixing with bad friends, in other words, bad friends.
48:43
They can put you inadvertently in bad situations.
So it's like foreseeing those things from the context of Yoni, Suman, Sicara and the work that still needs to be done, and then avoiding those things once you foresee them.
And by doing that you abandon all the definements that come that would come with it.
49:04
So what are the definements the monks should give up by the spelling.
So take a monk who, reflecting through the source, he does not tolerate essential, aversive, or cruel thought that has arisen.
He gives it up, gets rid of it, eliminates it, obliterates it, and that's the other suited dimension.
49:21
He actually explains how one gets rid of it, because people usually like people come to read the suitors with preconceived notions already with some ideas.
What practice is?
So generally today you are taught well, whenever these things are present, get rid of it, you know essential thought, replace it with this thought.
49:41
This is a place without thought, so you don't have to deal with it.
You actually, you don't have to endure the weight of it.
You don't have to discern it.
And and then when people read the Suta, it kind of or suit us like this.
I was like, oh, you see, the Buddha says you get rid of it, you obliterate it.
He's like, yes, the Buddha says that, but he also says how you do it.
49:58
And he certainly doesn't say, oh, you get rid of it simply by doing the opposite or by focusing on your nostrils and so on.
He says reflecting through the source you you dispel it.
We link that Suta where he clearly describes that for the five aggregates, So the for sorry for the five hindrances, not aggregates.
50:16
So when there's a hindrance of sensuality present, like if all your concern is to get rid of it, get rid of it.
Focus away.
Consider something else.
Distract yourself from it.
If you distract yourself from the hindrance, you will not be able to see what is the necessary basis for the hindrance.
50:32
How can you discern Through the source through to the source?
If your preoccupation is hindrance, get rid of it.
Hindrance.
Look away, Focus away, Calm down.
Forget the nostrils, belly, whatever you focus on just so I don't have to have this pressure in me.
50:49
That's why again, all this, dispelling all this doesn't tolerate.
He gives it up, gets rid of, eliminates, apply only to somebody who sought Apana.
So first you need to get the right view.
You need to develop, You only get the right view.
Then you'll be able to see through the central thought averse and by seeing through you're not tolerating it.
51:11
By seeing through the nature of the say site that you are preoccupied with, full of lust, seeing through the necessary basis to that extent see you are not now perpetuating gratuitously that sense objects of pleasure and so on.
Same with aversion, Same with the thought of cruelty and same with like again, so site sounds, multi touches thoughts, it's the same principle.
51:31
So he doesn't tolerate these harmful states.
In other words, he does not neglect his work of discerning the necessary source that's simultaneously present.
That's how you don't tolerate it.
And then it says the one who practices this, no definements can arise and this is the call definement that should be given by the spelling.
51:51
So as I said, we will link the suit up where it describes 5 hindrances.
And I'm repeating this because it's very relevant.
So it's not about when you have a hindrance available.
Hindrance of sleeping.
It's not like I'll do the opposite.
I'll do the mechanical thing or focusing away of something else or visualizing thing.
52:08
No, no, no.
You recognize what pressures you so that you can discern the necessary basis for that pressure.
And that's how you become unpressured.
And that sign of beauty that for somebody with Ionisomonisikara means central hindrance, remains standing there.
52:27
Because that's what Buddha said For Tatagata.
There is no desire and lust internally.
Beautiful things remain standing in the world.
It's not that he doesn't perceive what used to be inside incentive of lust and so on, but in order to get there, you need to 1st get that pressure, recognize the pressure of the hindrance, not try to just immediately blindly distract yourself, get rid of it, but discern the necessary basis and that's how you dispel it.
52:51
I gave the simulator many times in the past from the Sutas where it's like a turtle that the Jackal tries to bite its limbs and the turtle.
How does the turtle deal with the Mara and temptations and ways of trying to get the turtle to stick its limbs out?
By retracting inside sufficiently long enough, then the Jackal lose interest and then you can walk away.
53:12
And this is it.
Basically, by perceiving through the pressure and hindrance that pressure will be taken away from you.
And then once you cultivate that you only so sufficiently repeatedly, thoroughly, then even that pressure won't arise anymore.
So you would have truly dispelled the hindrances.
53:29
Arhant is a destroyer of the hindrances.
They cannot arise for him.
That's what that means.
So, so we are now to define this to be given up by developing and that's again here monk through Yoni Sumani sikara through correct context of Yoni Sumani sikara develops the awakening liberating factor of mindfulness, recollection.
53:56
Satya he develops the factor of discrimination of phenomena discernment which is damavicha.
He develops the Enlightenment factor of effort, vidia, energy, zeal to do the work.
54:12
He develops the Enlightenment factor of pity, which is joy, satisfaction, pasadi, tranquility and composure, which is Samadi.
So again, these things are developed through Yoni Sumana Sicario by somebody who has the right view.
54:32
And the final is the equanimity, which rely on withdrawal, dispassion, cessation, and ripen in relinquishment.
And through developing these factors he would have depend on all defilements through that development.
So if a monk through Yonisumanisikara gives up the defilements by seeing, by restraint, by using, by enduring or bearing, by avoiding, by dispelling, by developing, he's the monk that has surmounted and restrained and withdrawn from all the defilements.
55:07
He has cut off the craving, untied, untied the fetters, sever the fetters, and he's rightly comprehended and right by rightly comprehending, The slightest traces of his conceit basically are gone.
So there is no more even traces of I am and that flavor of of of ownership and things being mine.
55:26
And thus he has made a complete end to suffering, so satisfied the monks approve the word of Buddha said.
So that yeah, that kind of concludes the suit #2 and I don't want to go through like just a brief recap, basically it's like a for somebody who's not Sodepana.
55:55
Obviously, like the suit doesn't apply to you, but as I said in the previous recording, it's not like you should not try and align yourself with it.
But the reason why I keep saying it doesn't apply to you because it's very easy for somebody with the right view read the suitors.
56:10
They are not addressed to them, For them, they don't meet the necessary criteria for it, but you could still make sense out of them.
So you read the suitors and like, Oh yeah, OK, I can do enduring, I can do bearing, I can do this, I can do that, I can eat for right reasons and then ignore or rather stop thinking that they also need to develop the yonisum and sicara that is the necessary basis for all of this to be done rightly.
56:33
So could you make some sense out of it?
You stop looking for further sense in it.
And that's really the only reason why I keep insisting, Well, no, the demo starts with the right view.
If you know the sort upon, you do not see the demo.
If you're not sort upon, most of the studies don't apply to you because if you don't see what the practice is, how can you practice different aspects of that practice?
56:54
It just makes no sense.
It's not just to to to put people down or something.
It's more like just to to prevent from falling into thinking that you know that but you don't.
And you can easily fall into that once you start making sense of all these other things.
57:10
Oh yeah, you know, Sati Patana and all of this.
And Anapanasati, of course it's relatable to a degree.
You can see some sense in it, but it's not on the level that it matches.
Even this, as we started the suit, you only saw in the sky.
Wise reflection, considerate reflection, whatever.
57:26
People translate it and you could see exactly where that translation came from, came from making a sense out of it.
But if you're actually honest and see, but hold on in order so that it said that that is a factor for sorta party.
So did my wise consideration and instruction of others.
57:43
Is that resulting in sorta party when I engage with it?
When I engage with it?
Or do I have to keep doing it?
Do I have to keep wisely reflecting each time I'm presented with these challenges?
And so on, because then you realize, OK, so maybe it's not.
It doesn't match the extent that the Buddha meant by it, and you have nothing to lose if you take it to mean more.
58:04
You can only gain see if it only meant wise reflection, you were already right by thinking that from the start.
But if it means even something that contains wise reflection but means even more, such as discerning the necessary base of the present and during source of that which you're attending, if you discern that, well, it's a win win either way.
58:25
So that's why for as long as there is no right view, one should really take any suitor that they read with a pinch of salt.
And not forget the fact that if you were to fully understand any relevant suitor you know, not the suitor that talks about like Buddha instructing householders how to look after their wives and stuff like that, that's irrelevant.
58:46
Certainly relevant for the one who wants to practice.
So if you take any suitor that's practically relevant, you mustn't forget that if I were to understand this Suta on the level that matches, I'll be at least a SUTA panel, and if I were to fully understand it, I'll be another hunt like people often did at the end of the Suta.
59:05
And the point is then to keep that in mind each time.
Like wisely reflect that each time you read the Suta that should be the threshold you need to need to hold in your mind for understanding.
59:21
Because if you forget about the fact that well only Sutapana truly understands begins understanding of the Suta, then your protagonist understanding of that Suta will become adequate.
And you think, well, I'm not Surabana, but I understood the Suta is good enough.
59:36
If I understand many other Sutas on this good enough level, it will add up.
No it won't.
It doesn't.
It can add up.
Maybe in a sense that then it will make you revisit all those suitors and start seeing even more in them.
Sure, But again, the only time you will start looking for more is if you don't think you completely understood it.
59:55
If you take your understanding that you will inevitably have anything you read, anything, and you make sense out of it.
That's the degree of understanding.
But if you any understanding you have, you take a picture with a pinch of salt, read other suit and then you come back to it and then see if you can understand even more.
And more and more and more.
1:00:13
And as I said, if you do that rightly, that's the 50% of the right instruction is being taken rightly.
And then if you develop Yoni Suman Sicara through not attending wrong things that's why the constant talking about doing things rightly on the right level, sense restraint, withdrawal, celibacy, because it was hard enough to discern Yoni Suman Sicara back in the day, it's even harder today.
1:00:37
So if you pair those two things and know what to keep looking for and not fall into complacent view that because you made sense out of gamma thus you understand the gamma while at the same time you know you're not a sort of that's a contradiction terms.
So if you don't fall into that view then you would be keep well, you will keep pushing forward.
1:00:54
You will keep trying to understand.
The worst is to think you understood that which you didn't or you understood that which they still carries more To be understood like yoniso means wise reflection.
Fine, I won't think about it anymore.
It refers to yoniso.
1:01:09
Whenever Buddha says yoniso means wise reflection.
I engage with wise reflection and because of that you won't look for the immediacy of that term.
That actually is a factor for arising of the right view.
Those who listen to the Buddha and got the right view upon hearing his sentence is because yoniso has been there, waiting, developed.
1:01:30
They didn't have to go home.
Then wisely reconsider what they read or heard just upon hearing it.
Things slotted in place.
So that's why it needs to be taken on that deeper level of a more immediate level.
And you can pretty much take all the other key terms and notions from the Sutas on that deeper, more immediate level.
1:01:54
That doesn't invalidate your current understanding of it, but it certainly upgrades it.
And then again, it would make even more sense how if somebody truly understands the entire instruction from the Buddha back in the day, from the beginning till the end, at the end of the talk, they became an Arahan to realize, well, that's why it wasn't like some magic, like the mind was already there, thoroughly established with yoni.
1:02:19
So imperturbable yoni sort of development of sense, restrained, not giving, not attending, not emphasizing things that shouldn't be emphasized.
And now the Buddha just just described that for them in terms they should see it.
And they saw it because it was already there, unwavering mine was already developed, tamed to an unwavering extent to a sufficient extent, and then out of handship was the result of it.
1:02:42
It's like no nothing magic.
I mean, you could say it's magical experience, but really they did the work through that diligent and development of those enlightenment factors.