0:00
When is the right time to go into solitude?
You know, kind of thing.
And I think it's the same for whether you're a layperson or monk.
You have to be able to be a, you could say, a friend to yourself in a way.
0:18
You have to be able to live with yourself in ease, with ease.
So you have to be virtuous and sensual, strange and not have this a mind full of desire and hatred and confusion.
Because if you have that which is basically have been living with an enemy, if you if you have that kind of mind which is your enemy and you go and stay in solitude, well you are going to have a a difficult time.
0:48
So you have to have a mind which is your friend, and and any so mind with any of the qualities that a friend would have that you would consider someone who would befriend.
You know, kind, compassionate, not desirous, you know, lustful, averse, complaining all the time, anxious, and so on.
1:15
So how do you, how do you develop that friend of mine towards?
Yourself.
Well, you got you to quite a degree.
Bring those last version and distraction, confusion.
You have to bring that to an end by being virtuous.
1:34
You know, no longer doing things you know that are bad for you, bad for your mind, which make the mind lustful, and so on is your actions.
What if?
What if somebody can't help but breaking, keep breaking the pieces and losing sense of strength.
1:54
That's that's going to happen anyway.
So everybody's going to like, you know, not be able to help themselves in the beginning, but with you just keep trying and and seeing and seeing the benefit of trying and getting stronger and stronger and eventually you break them less and less so to speak.
2:18
Could that could that person still go into seclusion?
They're trying their best but failing every now and then.
Oh yeah, To to the degree that they are not that lustful.
That's full of hate and that full of confusion.
Yeah.
Then I think, you know seclusion is good for you know, just looking at the mind, reflecting on the the suitors, reflecting on these subjects a a a quiet time.
2:43
Not intense seclusion, but a quiet time and the of the day, a space where you can retire to, is good for any philosopher any anyone who wants to heal their mind needs to meet that mind.
3:02
And the best place for meeting it is a place of where there's no busyness, no others around and forests go for a walk, even a long long walk.
3:18
You're ready.
A person who's, you know, just living a normal day life.
If they just go on the weekend to a forest that already is by themselves contemplative, you start to think about your life, what this, what you're going to do.
3:34
You know with your life, all the things that happened.
You start rehashing the past and just just by that person can see that just walking alone in the forest, you can already see how you start going inwards and looking at yourself.
3:52
And that's another thing.
If you can't face yourself, if you can't even just admit to the things that you did wrong in the past, that walk, you won't even be going to that forest for a walk on the weekend.
It's just too much.
You would have to have your friends with you.
4:07
You would have to have your music playing in your ear because you just can't handle your yourself and that that type of person.
They need to do a lot more work actually.