0:02
So Bunte, I've been practicing for many years and it's one thing I just can't seem to overcome.
I've endured childhood, a certain childhood trauma, and it still haunts me.
Flashbacks of those events persist, leading me to mistrust the world and anticipate further pain.
0:25
It's the reason why I got into Buddhism causing and this also caused me to avoid relationships and become increasingly introverted.
How can I enjoy life and live with greater ease?
Well, that's your problem really, right there.
0:42
So you can't be practicing the dumb rightly and enjoying the life in the sense of relationships in the world.
The world is the peril, suffering, bond, trap, all of that.
0:59
So even if you had no trial traumas, if you actually want to practice them rightly, that should be taking in the direction of abandoning all relationships, abandoning the world, abandoning any ease that you find on account of that world.
Because it's not safe.
1:16
You're finding safety in the burning house.
So my answer to this person is really you need to kind of learn a bit more about actual goals of Damaa and then clarify your own goals in regard to it, 'cause it seems that you want to have both.
1:34
You're practicing the dama to overcome the trauma so that you can really enjoy the life that's not the dama you're practicing.
Because the if you don't, even if you're practicing that on a kind of a trauma, you would be overcoming the trauma by overcoming the world that your trauma depends on, that your trauma lives in.
1:54
And if you overcome the whole world, the whole possibilities of world, the future, no past traumas can touch you.
The reason why people are still under the thumb of the traumas is because they refuse to relinquish the world.
They refuse to relinquish the senses, sense organs, dependence on relationships, joys of the world and sensuality.
2:12
So you keep yourself inside of the the the Hunter's forest.
So you're going to be haunted still and in the past times you got caught and stuff will be always applicable.
It will always bother you because you refuse to give it all up.
And the person, this person, thinks that that the joy is the central pleasures in the world, the joys, the relationships, That's what that will cure that some are.
2:38
That's.
I mean those things in and of themselves are already afflictions.
Even if you had no specific traumas to talk about, dependent on being dependent mentally for your well-being, for your safety on, on the joys of the world, on the pleasures of the sense organs and senses, that's like the most perilous thing you can do.
2:59
That is the true affliction.
So in the way if somebody had the trauma didn't turn him towards dama, that's actually a fortunate thing.
But it's unfortunate that they maybe have not really come across the right instruction of the dama.
So they still under the impression that they can do both.
3:16
They can practice practice the DAMA to the extent of not being bothered by this specific trauma from their childhood, but at the same time enjoy the life and so on that the world that is basically the trauma in and of itself.
It's kind of interesting that, you know, you have this trauma out of it and the world shows itself to.
3:38
You exactly, exactly.
If the if the world was a good place, traumas would not be possible.
And fundamentally, again, if you feel like, oh I'm so fortunate, like other peoples were not other people were not traumatized in the past, but I was.
Well, they haven't been traumatized yet.
3:57
Maybe not in the childhood, but they will be traumatized.
Sickness is a trauma.
Old age is a trauma.
Failing senses a trauma.
Death is the ultimate trauma that nobody can avoid.
So from that point of view all the other traumas are fairly circumstantial, cause death is the chief of all traumas.
4:15
That's waiting.
Everyone.
And that is again, you would be affected by that if you still do not relinquish that world.
So don't think of traumas in in in in, in a way that all these these are the things that I must deal with.
4:30
Specifically, think of traumas as symptoms that reveal you the real nature of your situation, which is you are liable, you were liable to traumas, you are liable to pain, you're liable to suffering, and you will have to meet those things eventually unless you abandoned your entire dependence on sense organs, sense pleasures, the world, the joys, the relationships, and everything that come from it.
4:56
So you have a choice.
If you stay there, you don't have to just accept the fact that you're going to be haunted down by circumstances, by unpleasant feelings and eventually caught up with.
Or if you don't, then then you will actually at least try and apply yourself rightly in the sense of the correct practice of the Dhamma and abandon it once and for all.