0:02
But I've noticed that when I concentrate on something for an extended period brings about a sense of bliss and peace.
These states stick around and help me deal with life challenges.
I wonder if continuing this concentration practice might lead me to a point where I become untroubled by external things.
0:21
Wherever is this the right path and how long might it take?
I've invested a fair bit of time and I want to make sure, but it's worth 1.
I'll probably need a bit more details, but it doesn't sound like like the right path because if concentration helps you deal with the life challenges sounds more like a management practice to me.
0:45
Instead, you should ask yourself why you challenged in the 1st place.
Why do you need concentration?
To help you deal with the challenges.
If you were not challenged to begin with, you don't need to deal with it.
You don't need to concentrate.
You don't need to do anything.
You are unmoved to begin with.
That's the direction of practice.
1:02
If concentration helps you cope because you just can't bear it, fine.
But don't confuse that for the practice of the dama.
Because it isn't.
You wonder it will not arise.
It will not result in understanding because you're you're going the wrong way about it.
You're going trying to manage the suffering, which is kind of what protageners do, because they don't know the escape.
1:22
So for as long as you don't abandoned the value of suffering management, you will not look for the way of uprooting it.
You need to basically leave yourself no way out in order to to seek the true escape from it to see.
1:40
The real cause?
Yeah, to to, to.
Basically, if you leave this, if you stop managing your suffering, if you recognize that you're surrounded by it like the king, surrounded by the armies from the four directions you need, then you realize, OK, the the, the weight of the problem.
And then you can be able to look for it, for for the way out rightly, to uproot in the craving.
2:01
And that's exemplified with what I just said.
You ask yourself, why am I bothered in the 1st place?
Why is life challenging me?
Why can life challenge me in the 1st place rather than who?
I found something that helps me always deal with different challenges.
No, I want to be not challenged in the to begin with.
2:21
That's the liberation.
So why?
Why am I challenged?
Why am I challenged to begin with?
Yeah, so the DAMA does not provide instruction how to deal with the life challenges.
The DAMA approves the life.
2:38
So there are no challenges for you, so you're readies.
But.
I guess what I got from this question was like if you if you keep on concentrating and focusing and doing this, this piece of build up build up.
Build up.
And these whole waking moments.
2:54
Will just culminate on its own.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, well that's that's not how it works.
Which is exactly why I started describing this as two opposite directions.
You cannot be managing your suffering and at the same time trying to uproot it.
Because in order to uproot it, you need to stop giving in to the tendency and craving for management.
3:15
Management is a quick fix.
Management is depressuring of the container.
An uprooting can occur if the container is pressure pressurized rightly to the right extent, let's put it that way.
3:31
So each time you give in to a management you release the pressure.
So it's mutually exclusive, releasing the pressure, building the pressure, releasing the pressure, building the pressure.
So you have to give up that tendency towards management in order for that pressure that's been built up to turn you in the right direction.
3:50
See the cause for the for the liability to to be bothered, which is unwholesome behavior by body speech in mind that's still perpetuated.
Lack of establishment in virtue, lack of sense restraint, lack of knowledge and transparency in regard to your intentions.
4:08
Lack of enduring the hindrances on the right level without acting out of them, without trying to get the lack of development.
Then concentration basically provides you this, like a narrow focusing, thinning out where you stop seeing the problems while it's still very much in front of your face.