0:01
So I thought to talk about, you know how the suitors often say established in virtue.
So it's it's even like kind of almost just synonymously with getting the right view.
0:19
You'll be like in that suit where your monk wanted to go in solitude in the Buddha and then well, the Buddha told him not to.
He ignored him, went there, had a hard time, couldn't control his mind, came, came back and said that to the Buddha.
And they would have said well indeed, for as long as one is not established in virtue or has Jana properly, like the mind of Jana developed or has a right view, it's to be expected and the the thoughts of sensuality will overwhelm him in solitude and so on.
0:53
So I guess the question is how one gets established in virtue.
Is it enough to just keep the presets, or would just keep in the presets automatically or eventually result in establishment in virtue which is, as I said virtually like like getting the right view?
1:30
You're saying if you just keep, I don't kill anyone, I don't steal.
And that's, yeah, just keeping the precepts.
Somebody just keeping the precepts, does that mean they're established in virtue or do you need to do something more?
Reflect on why the value of of the precepts of the virtue and the danger of not keeping the pieces.
2:03
Well, I'm sure people who just keep the pieces to do that, it's not that they don't think about it.
So is that would that be enough to be established?
Is that is that enough to become a sort of partner?
We're with the right instruction.
2:21
And again they hear the right instruction, on account of which they keep the presets and reflect upon their intentions.
So is that enough for sort of party?
Is that enough to be close to the mind of jhana and ready for the solitude and overcome everything else?
2:42
What is something else missing but?
You have to understand what virtue is, what non virtue is.
Meaning you have to you can say I don't, I won't kill anyone.
But you know why would I kill anyone?
2:58
What?
What are the qualities that would make me kill anyone and then remove those qualities which could be enough.
For example anger.
Anger towards resistance towards painful feeling.
And if I remove that that craving then I cannot kill anyone.
3:18
I cannot break any precepts and then by removing a craving then I'm established in virtue because I don't have a basis for non virtue.
What was?
That.
3:44
Yes.
So it's not about the rules of the precepts specifically, but about, well, understanding why he, why they are always wrong, basically, and what?
4:08
Would is it a simpler way of answering this question?
Because, you know, like we understand or understand the value and why.
But say somebody who's not as familiar with all these kind of jargon, so to speak, is there a way of development that they can do that would result in establishment of virtue?
4:29
So it's it's the presets that you start with.
But what else is lacking in regard to those presets For somebody who is keeping them but is not established in virtue and they can be keeping them for 50 years but still not be established in that virtue.
4:53
So like we can even think in terms of the the, the, the faith type, you know, the one that does not necessarily have a vast amount of information on the knowledge of the suitors, but has has his confidence established in the right instruction that leads from merely keeping the precepts all the way to Aranji.
5:16
It's the it's that that same thread that he has grasped and has enough confidence to do it.
So what is that threat?
What is that that he would need to do?
So keeping the precepts is obviously not enough on its own.
What else?
Again, within the same framework, what do they need to do?
5:40
Not act out of craving, but that's what I said.
But you can't.
You can't add because, yeah, because yeah, the full understanding of craving, it sort of feeds not acting out and not acting out, but it takes time to get there, so.
Not distracting yourself.
But that's in a way, yeah, that's close enough to the to the to what I'm what I'm aiming at self.
6:02
Reflection in the sense that.
Again, that can be sure.
Again, the term self reflection can mean anything for anybody really.
They can take that to mean reevaluating it.
But just like on the basis of precepts, what do people not do?
6:19
Even when they keep the precepts, where do they?
What do they like?
Where do they stop short thinking what they're doing?
No, they might think about it doing it, but still won't do it.
6:37
So let's start with this.
So what is the what did the presets apply to?
What are they supposed to purify?
Presets the intentions more coarsely than that, harming yourself and others.
6:54
Bodily.
Behavior, bodily behavior, Yeah, OK, so you start with the bodily behavior.
And again, just we're keeping it very simple.
I'm not asking for like abstract complex answers.
Just somebody who prepared the Buddha once and I can do that and did it and became another without any other instruction so they would start.
7:15
OK, presets are the kind of a coarse container, well, container for the coarse bodily misbehavior.
So you contain that.
And do they need to stay there, that container?
7:33
Can that container be taken further so you have body?
What else?
You have speech in mind?
Yeah.
So the main reason then, that somebody is not established in the precept is because they have not applied them on these three levels.
7:51
So in the same way you're restraining your bodily behavior, you need to restrain your speech.
Same way, exactly, same way, no, no other information or reasoning necessary.
And then in the same way you restrain your body and your speech, you need to restrain your mental images, which ones you revolve around.
8:12
And you realize, Oh yeah, no, most people don't do that.
Even people that, as I said, can keep the priests for hundreds of years, you realize are you never hear the part about restraining your mind on that right level.
Like you might hear about concentrate on this and when this is present you do that.
8:31
But all of those are actions and reactions.
Just in the same way you abstain from intentionally giving in to certain bodily behavior, in the same way you abstain from giving in to certain verbal behavior.
It's exactly the same thing that you're doing, basically.
8:51
That's something that people might not see because they might say in theory, OK, yes, I need to be purified in my mind as well, but they might think that that is something.
Different.
Than the bodily.
And verbal behavior, and that's why.
I mean, that's why they would remain keeping the preset for decades and not become established in Virtue because.
9:12
But it's in the same suit as they talk about keeping the preset, it carries on talking about how to then keep the speech and keep the mind, so to speak.
So it's it's laid out in the same manner, in the same suitors in the same way, but it's somehow there Is that kind of OK, no, this applies up to here and the rest of this OK speech.
9:33
Yes, people can see there is some input of their own, but when it comes to mind or that will somehow magically happen on account of this practice or that practice, but you realize, no, no, no, you are fully responsible when you have images of sensuality.
As I said, well, you know, you can try to deny them and and distract yourself from it and replace that experience with another.
9:54
But there is no there is no restraint and there's certainly no understanding of it.
Or you could if you if you have such images or images of it will.
It's probably even more easier to relate for people.
So if you're annoyed by somebody, by person specifically, you're going to have images of them, of that experience, of of what you should have, all of these images that revolve around that experience.
10:18
You're going to have your mind have them, and you are the one who then chooses to, as I said before, rest on those images and allow them to then perpetuate themselves.
You don't have to fight them, you don't have to try and get rid of them, but you certainly need to not give them your wrong attention in that manner.
10:36
So don't allow your mind to rest on them and don't lose the reference point in regards to those images.
And that's how you restrain your mind.
So restraining the mind in regard to the unsuitable images is not on the level of trying to get rid of the images or not have them arise in the 1st place.
10:52
It's on the level of learning how to not give them the wrong attention.
Not having the center stage.
Yeah, not have them in in the center basically they then kind of makes the whole thing revolve around it and that's again that is on the basis of the intentional effort.
11:09
It's not like because again, you see even that is so invisible to people that they would think.
Also I need to practice this moment to moment concentration to catch these little moments in between these thoughts.
That's not where these things are.
If you have been restraining your body, in other words restraining the course outlets towards sensuality, will and other unwholesome things, then on top of that you restrain your speech.
11:37
And there are again many instances in the suitors what type of speech, Speech you should not be engaging in.
And again, that's on the basis of the intentional effort you intentionally not allow yourself to become established on.
11:52
Like in the experience of bad speech, in regard to this, in regard to that, in regard to gossip, malice, careless chatter, all of that.
When you get no, you don't do it.
Again, I don't have to get rid of the intention or having to feel guilty for doing it.
No.
Once you catch it on that level, that's when you stop.
12:08
When you realize that it's it's on the basis of your choice, and then the same leads to the choice on that mental in regard to the mental images.
When they present themselves, you realize you have a choice.
Will I continue to give them the center stage and then divorce myself from the experience of here and now and whatever else I was doing and let my mind kind of run with it?
12:31
Or will I say no, I will not allow that.
Let them be there, but I will not allow my mind to focus on them fully, because that is a choice.
So what do you do?
So obviously we've all heard that suitor that says, you know, he destroys those thoughts, he obliterates them.
12:50
Yeah, he smashes them out of existence.
Yeah, but then he describes how.
So how do you smash them out of existence?
How do you get rid of?
It How do you destroy those thoughts by?
Not thinking out of them.
Yeah, by, by, by practicing Yoni Suman E Sikara.
13:08
In regard to them, the suit is very clearly say that it's the properly attended thoughts.
So see in order to attend something properly or improperly it needs to be there.
That's the point.
So these thoughts are there.
So the question is not not having those thoughts.
The question is, oh, not attending to them mistakenly or I'm concurrently, concurrently how I say, but to attend to them rightly so.
13:33
All you need to do in regard to sweeping the leaves and having the thoughts of ill will is not our focus hard on the moments and sensations of leaves.
So these thoughts don't bother me, nor is it I'll forget about sweeping the leaves or I'll even stop sweeping the leaves and I'll just resolve this in my mind.
13:49
It's basically recognizing that both are there simultaneously present.
So you have thoughts of your will, images associated with the person that upset you, and you do have recognition of what you're doing.
Here.
In our three or other senses, establishing that balance between the two is enough to not wrongly attend to ill will.
14:12
It's enough to not wrongly attend to sensuality.
It's enough to not wrongly attend to any hindrance.
And once that becomes more palpable, you realize, Oh yeah, I obliterate them by not giving, by not feeding them through wrong acknowledgement and mistaken attention.
14:28
So the recognition of the like, simultaneous 2 domains enduring you, sweeping the leaves, talking here in mind, thinking certain thoughts at the same time.
You're not denying it, but you're certainly not forgetting which where you are on account of it.
And I mean, a good point as well is that it is important to realize that you can, if you are like afraid of having such thoughts, or even, you know, seeing yourself having such thoughts, you don't want to kind of admit them to yourself or something.
15:09
You don't want to be having those thoughts.
That in in itself will make it hard to actually correctly attend them, because you will be like trying to by trying to ignore them.
You're actually, that's already a wrong way of attending.
15:24
Them.
You're giving them that wrong attention, and actually that's allowing them to proliferate there in the background.
Just ignoring and that's really the root of all unwholesome.
So the presence of those images in regard to sensuality or images in regard to your will or in regard to worry, that's not the root of unwholesome, that's not the root of suffering.
15:43
That's in in those numerous suitors in Agutra Nikaya where they said there is not a single thing such as Ionis, Sumana, sicada, the incorporated tension that makes unwholesome things increase, wholesome decrease and unreason unwholesome to arise.
16:01
And consequently there's not a single thing that makes unwholesome things decrease and wholesome increase, such as Yonis humanist cigar.
So that is the root of it.
And and that's exactly how one becomes established in virtue.
You realize by practicing the same restraint in regard to the body, the speech, and the mind on the right mental level.
16:26
And you realize, OK, so restraint on the mind is not just denial of things.
I just deny things to to not arise because you did.
Well, that's not even the restraint on the level of the body.
The restraint on the level of the body is not acting out towards possibilities that remain there in the world.
16:42
But you choose to abstain from it, and then you're abstaining your sense.
Restraint exists concurrently with those possibilities.
Neither are excluded.
You just choose to maintain this in regard to that that is still present, very much so.
17:00
Same with speech.
And then you recognize, oh, so it's exactly the same principle with the mind.
Which is why, as I said, in the suitors the whole thing is often bundled together the same purification.
It does not change or skip a beat and become something else.
It's exactly the same development all the way through.
17:16
But yes, that mental level needs to be discerned, of course.
So recognizing images associated with sensuality, images associated with with your will, with any hindrance.
And it's like, OK, so I don't try to get rid of them.
I know that they're there, but I do not allow them to become, as I said, the center of my focus either to trying to get rid of them, fear them, act out of them, and so on.
17:41
And that's the whole mindfulness of the body that gets developed, because that's what's always concurrently present with, regardless of what state of mind you're in.
You have your body there, enduring simultaneously to that extent, and that doesn't change, cannot change.
17:58
Being fully aware of them is not awareness, it's absorption.
You can be fully absorbed in them, but then you're not aware of yourself or anything else in your experience.
Or you can be like half aware of something there but trying to kind of ignore it and pretend it's not there and like focus on the leaves and everything else that you're doing.
18:21
And equally you're not, you're not actually properly aware of the thing, you're trying to ignore it.
Whereas because because these things can really only operate where there's kind of a degree of ignorance, a degree of like ignoring it, ignoring one end of your experience at the expense of the other.
18:38
So I mean, I'm just saying that because like the concurrency and so on can sound a bit abstract, but really it's more like it is, it is is an intention that's present, being fully aware of it, not kind of fearing it, not needing to kind of get rid of this.
It it can't continue to proliferate unless you deliberately decide to do it and then.
18:58
That's The thing is that deliberation?
Yeah.
So it boils down to the very deal deliberation aspect of it.
So it's it's just that obviously you need to you need to 1st restrain other more coarser forms of deliberation.
But once you start to recognize that allowing those images to take the center stage of your experience, it's an act.
19:20
It's a deliberate act and it's like oh I I need to restrain that.
So yeah, I agree.
Like whether we talk about intention or concurrency or all of these are kind of an indirect ways of pointing it, there is an act of deliberation either towards I want to get rid of these thoughts.
19:39
Again, it's a deliberate kind of denial or I'll deliberately give in to them.
I'll just they're pressuring me.
These images are just just taking up all of my attention span and there is always a point where you choose to give into that and you realize oh that's what you need to not do.
19:57
So just don't give in to that last drop.
You can have all those images all you want, but if you don't allow that last OK I I I will allow them to take the center stage.
You are in the clear, You're in the clear.
And if you sustain that last, not giving in on that mental level, the establishment of virtue in virtue is taking place.
20:20
And then exactly that comes down to that.
Oh, so yes, you are actually addressing things in the root.
So then the future bodily misbehaviour or verbal misbehaviour will be even less likely if already on that mental level you are.
You're recognizing that deliberate act of allowing these things, giving in, and you're not doing it, just that you let them be.
20:42
But you don't do just that last, last drop.
And that's exactly what what the suitors would be describing like he doesn't welcome these thoughts, so you realize they're there.
It's not a question of getting rid of them, The question is of not welcoming them.
So when you have even thoughts of will, will that are unpleasant, you do welcome them to then try to resolve it or act out, and so on.
21:03
And there is that it feels that it's almost like not subconscious, but it kind of feels like a like an unconscious habit of you just can't help but welcome 1st and then try to resolve it.
21:19
And the reason why you can't help but welcome first mentally is because physically you still have not been thoroughly developed in that uprooting those wrong types of deliberate acts.
Nor verbally.
You have not allowed those things to come up closer to the mental level where whereby the mental deliberation would become more obvious.
21:40
And you do always see that, as I said, like you can, you can be dwelling, physically restrained, but then something that's not necessarily unwholesome, like and you kind of know that in and of itself, and nobody will be upset.
21:57
But you know that it's rooted in desire, or you know that in you, or this is rooted in your will.
But it is not a technical prohibition against saying something.
But again, you know that you are doing it out of your will.
So you deliberately then choose to act out of that.
22:16
You deliberately choose to, to ignore the fact that, yeah, I know it's technically nothing wrong, but I'm not here to deal with technicalities.
I'm here to uproot suffering and free myself from craving.
And then you do this also, Then there is no excuse.
There is no exception.
If things are rooted in obvious and wholesome states of mind, I should not say that it doesn't matter what happens to the world.
22:38
So if you've been practicing that long enough, you will get to recognize that even before it comes to like speech and pertaining to speech, you will recognize those types of same deliberations and allowances in welcoming and accepting and turning a blind eye on that mental level.
23:09
That's also, it relates to what you were saying about it being equivalent to the right getting the right view.
Because it also relates to how the Sutas described it as becoming independent of others in the sense of not being able to put any thing that others might say.
23:34
Or no matter how much the world sort of says that this is OK, no matter how many other people who are all, you know, I respect them and everything and they all do it, So it must be fine.
Or whatever other kind of notion or relying on others to some extent.
23:50
It can't kind of get prioritized above what you know your intention is rooted in, because you always know that you can't.
You can deny it, you can cover it up with other things, but fundamentally, if you look, it's always your intentions will tell you what they are.
24:11
Yeah.
And that has to be.
And and and also then you could also see how getting the right view is not an accident.
It's not like a a lucky kind of experience that somebody just stumbles upon, you know, It's just you go in this direction of development and established in virtue equals right view.
24:46
So yeah, you realize then a person could out of faith take on the precept, learn about what's wholesome, what's unwholesome, abstain from unwholesome physically.
Then when the mind, when the mentally mind starts to pressure them and they start, you know they might not be acting out physically, but they want to act out verbally or distract themselves verbally and start engaging in all this.
25:09
Then they restrain that.
They recognize OK, no, I will not give in to that.
Regardless of whether it's acceptable or not, I know that it's rooted in the same type of pressure that I'm restraining in regard to body behavior.
So if they haven't been acting out of speech, then either again, it's like obviously depends on individual, but it won't be before long.
25:29
If this is done rightly, you will get to then see the same pressure on the mental level.
So yes, you're not acting by the body, you're not acting by the speech.
But are you acting by the mind?
Are you acting out?
And as we described, acting out by the mind incurs a certain degree of losing self-awareness in regard to your own thoughts, choosing to deliberately allow them to take the center stage, not yourself awareness in regard to the thoughts, the concurrency of it, and so on.
26:00
But even as I said, without going into the simultaneity and the principle behind, just as a mere practice, OK, so I will not deliberately allow my attention to rest upon thoughts of sensuality when they come up and start pressuring me images, I will not deliberately allow to rest my attention myself.
26:24
My experience as a whole on the images of ill will, they can be there, but I won't get that.
I won't like take them and put them in front of me whereby you know everything else is going to start revolving around them.
So that's how you don't act out of it.
26:41
In the same sense, when there is a a possibility to act out with your body in an unwholesome manner, you don't go and destroy the tempting thing and kill people that might excite you or or irritate you or I'll have to get rid of it.
26:56
That's how I free myself from the world.
So you realize, oh, so you can't do the same applies to the mind.
You can't just oh, I'll get rid of these thoughts.
I'll forget about them.
I'll focus on something else.
He's like, well, yeah, but again, the same principle remains.
You still the root of the problem is not having those thoughts in the 1st place.
27:14
The root is that you cannot not allow them deliberately to take the center stage.
So the training is there.
OK.
When the thoughts are present, I must have to recognize that deliberate act of allowing them to to become sort of established in this center experience.
27:32
And then everything else, everything else I do, becomes rooted in it.
So abstaining from that last allowance, that last welcoming, which is, as I said, a deliberate act, even if it feels like automatic and subconscious, It's only because you haven't developed your behavior sufficiently in those more coarse manners, Do you, through your ACT or through your reasoning, Are you putting or implying the blame to be in those images or renew wrongly tending to them?
28:03
And that's the key here.
And you realize if you're denying it, if you're using meditation, concentration technique, if you're doing this in response to that, that implication is always going to be there.
You think those images are the problem and that's why you don't see the root of the problem.
28:18
And that's why you won't be free in regard to it.
And that's why you won't be established in virtue.
So it's you attending to them wrongly.
In other words, you letting them take the center stage is the wrong attention.
So abstaining from that deliberate act, you are purifying way of attending to things, right?
28:39
It's not a separate mystical practice.
Or I got to practice yoniso and then apply it.
No, not allowing them to take the center stage, which is a deliberate act, however subtly might be is your Yoniso Monica practice.
It's not a question of focus really.
The question is more of a deliberate degree of unfocused in regard to things you should be unfocused from.
29:02
Because the focus is, you're being pressured to focus.
Exactly.
You're being pressured to give in and welcome this and accept it and then deal with it either through denial or indulgence.
Doesn't matter.
But first and foremost, it's like that pressure to take me and there is no that's that's the root of also me taking it.
29:21
Not this thing being there or pressuring me either.
And the breath is there regardless of whether you attend to it or not.
So.
That's well, everything is there, regardless of whether you're attending or not.
Yeah, the five aggregates, the body, the four postures, the breath, whichever weight basis for your mindfulness you want to take.
That's also why it equals like, well, sort of safety, sense of sense of safety in terms of it being something that can only ever be.
29:46
It's totally in your hand, like nothing can.
No amount of images, yeah that come up.
If if your view to some degree implies that the problem in those is in those images, you can never feel safe because it's always possible that some image and.
30:03
You have absolutely.
There's no way.
To hide from them, no matter what you can do, it can.
Still, it still might be possible that this might arise, and there's no way of knowing or being sure that this can never arise again.
Exactly.
But so like, to the extent that you have some kind of notion or fear, or when what if this comes up or what if that comes up, you can sort of know that your your virtue is not completely established.
30:28
Because if it were virtue, that is, being established in virtue means recognizing virtue as something that no, nothing can.
Come in between you, between you and it.
Yeah, it is.
It is.
It is.
It is always in your hand, yeah.
He's just, as I said, for most people it's too subtle because they haven't been practicing sense restraint properly with the body nor with the speech.
30:51
So this feels like too subtle to notice.
And that's when you say you should not welcome these thoughts for people that equals I must get rid of those thoughts.
But that's not the same statement.
But if you, if you look at your intentions on the level of body and the speech and as I said, not act out of them and then endure the mental pressure in states in regard to it, this deliberate act of accepting images on that subtle level will become apparent.
31:16
Somebody said something upsetting.
There is a pressure, There is an influx of images that are associated with that person in like a manner of ill will.
While I'm sitting here talking to you, I could choose now to withdraw my attention from sitting and talking to you and allow these thoughts to take the center stage and start to revolve and feed and this and that.
31:40
And I should have said, I will say next time or I was like, no, I'll let that domain, the entire domain of the mind that revolves around these images.
I'll let it be there, but I will not allow it to deliberately take over me.
That's it.
That's it.
Just that last drop and you're like, oh, it's a it's a restraint.
31:56
It's exact same principle of restraining the body, restraining the speech.
I'm restraining the mind.
Restraining the mind means not allowing your mind to take over you, whereby you lose yourself.
Awareness does not mean denying my mind, denying these thoughts, trying to get rid of them, trying to counter them or something.
32:13
Because you don't do that in regards to things that tempt you by the body.
You're not countering them constantly.
You know if you see something beautiful, you go and destroy it and make it ugly.
No.
So restraining your mind means restraining basically the images when they present themselves from overwhelming you in a sense of making you lose self-awareness and making you basically allow them accept them as the centre stage of your efforts and acts.
32:44
And that's where that whole kind of the necessity of purifying your bodily behaviour first, it's not optional like if you're still giving in by the body and all these things will remain abstract.
It would be too subtle to see, because even the bodily intention of its coarse nature, nature, you still give in, which means you still imply basically that the problem is in things that tempted you.
33:08
That's why you give in to them, or you act out of them with anger or whichever way.
And so that needs to be contained first.
And then on the subtle level, speech, saying things you say things you want to say, pressure to say, and so on.
33:25
Same recognition.
Is it rooted in the pressure?
I won't say it, I'll say everything else if I have to, but I won't say that I will not deliberately accept it.
But what if it stays there for like 6 months, pressuring me?
33:41
Doesn't matter if it stays for 60 months, 60 years, 6 eons, I I won't say it.
I won't accept that to be to.
I won't accept that act.
I won't accept those images.
And that's usually why people give in.
What if this lasts forever?
It's like, well, that's the training pressuring images.
34:00
They want you to accept them.
So if you don't accept them, they're going to obviously pressure you more to accept them, but they can't do anything else to you except trying to pressure you into accepting them.
So as you might feel like scary and overwhelming initially, but you know, but that is the root to the problem.
34:19
Everything else that follows, all this, all the things that I've previously restrained, all the unwholesome, was all just the result of this accepting images of the unwholesome nature, deliberately allowing them to take the center stage.
So if I never do that, I don't have to worry about anything else at all.
34:38
Even if those images.
Even if they keep coming, as I said for next 60 years, you realize, well, not accepting them.
It's kind of effortless.
I don't need to go anywhere, climb the mountains.
I don't need to do anything except mentally not not accept them deliberately and allow them to take the center stage.
34:58
That's all I need to do.
So it.
Is peaceful.
It's not a fight, It's.
Not a it's exactly, yeah.
A.
Task, and you realize why it will result in the economic completely like there will be no room for ill will, nor any room for sensuality.
35:13
I was going to.
Say like you realize that kind of fearing.
What if this pressure keeps pressuring me for whatever mental that's actually, that's the that's why it's pressuring.
35:30
It's not it's not it's not it that it's pressuring you.
If you kind of stop fearing it, pressuring you and you just say, well yeah, you can keep for however long it takes.
Infinite, infinitely, like infinite, infinitely patient.
35:45
I suppose in regard to it, it cannot.
There's no room for any pressure there, because if you're infinitely patient, that's almost like the definition of just something that's not bothering you at.
All, and that's the point.
Developing patients in regard to the right things, people can develop patients in regards to things that do not that still imply the wrong view.
36:06
They still imply that the problem is in the wrong place.
But when it comes to this true restraint, true physical restraint, verbal restraint, once you recognize the deliberate acceptance of unwholesome thoughts on the mental level, it was OK.
So if I develop patients in regard to that, then yeah, that's really much the root of the development and that is like the the true kind of patient endurance.
36:40
Obviously patient endurance has to be accessed in regard to the body when you're pressured to act in regard to the verb or when you're pressured to act.
But the root of it is patient endurance in regard to the images associated with an wholesome they want me to accept.
They want me to deliberately allow them welcome them to take the center stage.
37:00
Then, even if I then practice mindfulness and read the suitors and do all of this, all all of that I do in response, all of that I do as a way of managing the fact that I couldn't help but welcome them and open the door for them.
So not welcoming them does not equal denying them it simply equals not welcoming them, even if they remain sitting in your face for as long as they want.
37:25
There's no that's the practice.
Learning how to sustain that Yoni Suman E Sikara.
The right way of attending to them, as if you are not welcome, regardless of everything else.
And then they'll stop coming completely and you realize, yeah, you truly obliterated them.
37:50
Destroy them.
Surpass them like they're not coming up anymore.
Factory, you say?
This is the the the definition, the difference between it's a mind or the definition in the suitors that you read about quite often limited and unlimited.
38:10
So your mind is limited by this ill will, and now it is not limited by that thing.
It's not bound to it.
And well yes, yes there would be.
There would be like a different degrees of limit as well, like see once this, once this becomes more and more apparent through being rightly restrained, rightly established in your precept in your speech, then you start to recognize that the the, the deliberate welcoming of thoughts.
38:40
Obviously you know, as I said, it's not going to be perfect overnight.
So you might you might not do it, but then you might do a little bit.
So to the extent that you allow it to take the center stage to the center you you welcome it.
To that extent that you're limited, so you might be less limited than before.
38:57
But if there is the slightest extent of welcoming such thoughts to that extent there is a limit.
So when you truly then mind is completely free from slightest degree of welcoming those thoughts, you mind is unlimited and that's basically when you're surmounted the five hindrances.
39:19
The ill rules not limiting.
You you deliberately allowing it to center state.
Take the center stage is the limit.
That's that's what limits it.
That's what narrows it down.