0:05
So John, Jana is referred to as a sense of safety.
In what way is it safety and what is it safe from?
0:23
Is it possible to point out some type of or more mundane or lower level safety that carries the same principle as the safety of Jana, which could therefore help to lead one in the right direction for developing it?
So what is the sense of?
Safety.
0:40
So it's safety from your own mind being able to turn against you.
It's basically safety from within.
You know, like all those suttas with a simile of an intimate friend working against you, trying to kill you in your sleep and stuff like that.
0:58
Well, that's your own mind.
So Jana is the beginning of safety from your own mind where you know it and that's why you feel that rapture or whatever they want to translate it.
Pity like you, you feel a like a physical relief, joy, upliftment.
1:20
Whichever way you want to describe that pleasure for the first time you're feeling safe from the most accurate, most precise root of suffering, which is your mind affected with craving And you and you see that that is impossible.
1:43
Mind cannot possibly turn in that direction in Jana and on account of that to experience confidence and immeasurable safety.
So the mundane examples, well, I mean the Buddha gave number of mundane examples and you could see why they would, they would translate quite well, yes, say say like the the example of being released from a prison, there was the example for the pleasure of the first John.
2:15
So imagine you're in prison, falsely or rightly doesn't matter.
And you worry about your property, about your house, about your wealth, about your family, about everything, everything you worked for.
2:33
And then you, you released from that prison.
So you are still apprehensive to see what you're gonna find.
And then you go, you get back home and things are even better than what you left, how you left it.
So you have a tremendous release and joy and happiness.
2:49
Did not just he did not he was not taken or lost, he got even better.
So that relief, basically it's the same like, say you feel imprisoned by the possibility of your own mind to disobey, to go against itself on that most fundamental level.
3:12
So like you can't prevent things, you can't prevent perception from arising, you can't prevent feelings from arising and you know that.
And that's not the problem.
The problem and the the fearful part, the the, the anxious part is the fact that you could end up perceiving something suddenly or feeling something suddenly, and your mind will decide to turn against it internally, to turn against itself perceiving it.
3:46
And that's like the deepest sort of pain, denial, anguish.
So whatever specific thing that might be, it will have to fall into this category.
It will have to have a common thread of a mind turning against itself when paired with something that's deemed unwanted, unpleasant, whatever.
4:09
And see, that's the ever present sort of possibility.
Not the fact that you can perceive something upsetting, but the fact that upon perceiving something upsetting, upsetting your mind can.
Really turn against you and that will show you the full extent of your impotence and an imprisonment.
4:37
You're imprisoned under your own mind under that wild animal that we often refer to.
It's all fine and good when it doesn't turn against you, and then you pretend it never will.
But at the back of your mind you are aware that it is always a possibility that something would disturb that mind to such an extent that he would want to cancel you as well.
5:00
He would want to cancel everything and you will have no say in it.
So that's why people go around fearing this or that or avoiding, because they don't want to experience the the, the rawness of that mind.
5:18
If it's upset, they don't want to upset it.
That's what people don't want to keep the precepts in, in sensory strain, because that's already starts upsetting the mind.
They then starts throwing all sorts of irrational things at you and fears and doubts and hindrances just to to to, to show its power basically to get you back in line.
5:37
And none of that's possible in the first genre.
In the first genre, the roles are completely reversed.
You are fully withdrawn from the entire extent and power of that mind, and you know it and the mind knows it and that's why it calms down.
5:57
Like the example you gave the other day about the tamed elephant, now the might you know, and the mind knows that it's free anyway, that it's tame, that it's calm, The craving is gone.
So now it's like I I cannot crave anymore.
6:13
The mind knows it.
Yeah, like once you tame the mind properly, then exactly even that mind will realize.
Oh, actually the this is better for for me too.
Like the only reason he was doing what he was doing was because he was wild and untamed and he didn't know anything better than that.
6:34
But once you sort of honed in, trained it, calmed it, tamed it, made it incapable of turning against you or against itself, then it is oh, this was actually for my welfare all all along.
6:52
I just wasn't aware of it.
Keeping the precepts was pleasant sense.
Restraint was pure joy.
But until you develop that tameness of that mind, it will feel like the opposite, because the mind will resist it.
7:09
So once it tastes the pleasure of being a having fulfilled the precepts, face the pleasure of sense restraint that's already like that, getting it ready to realize that.
Well, that's why, like for for a household, that in the sutras, you know, the Buddha did not teach them meditation techniques and whatnot.
7:28
He told them to to reflect and frequently recollect their unbroken virtue, their aggregated virtue, their faith in the Buddha, the Dhama, the Sangha, the dhama.
Basically recollect those things, think about those things, and the mind will come down and experience pleasant abiding here and now.
7:44
Which is a description for John F when he came to monks pleasant abiding here and.
Now aids in a turning a complete turning away of from all unwholesome things.
Yes, isn't.
It it goes.
In the same way, that's that's the result.
The more pleasure you get from virtue, the more it's going to go, the more you realize, oh, this is blameless, easy.
8:06
Blameless, easy and effortless, John is the result of rightly taming your mind.