0:01
So this is the Chanda Suta Samutanikaya 42 one.
So once at Savati, Chanda approached the Blessed One, paid homage to him, sat down to one side and said, Venable Sir, what is the cause and reason why someone here is known as rough?
0:25
And what is the cause and reason why someone here is known as gentle?
So I think he's he's asking if in this in your dumb mind discipline.
Who is rough and who is gentle and who is gentle?
Right, according to the Buddha's understanding.
0:40
But then OK.
And so the Buddha replies, here, someone has not abandoned lust.
Because he has not abandoned lust, others irritate him.
Being irritated by others, he manifests his irritation.
0:57
He's known as rough.
He has not abandoned hatred.
Because he has not abandoned hatred, others irritate him.
Being irritated by others, he manifests irritation.
He's known as rough.
He has not abandoned distraction or Vita delusion.
1:15
Because he has not abandoned distraction, others irritating.
Being irritated by this, he manifests irritation.
He's known as rough.
This is the cause and reason why 1 can be known as rough.
And then here someone has abandoned lust.
1:33
Because he has abandoned lust, others do not irritate him.
Not being irritated by others, he does not manifest irritation.
He is known as gentle.
Likewise with hatred and distraction, delusion.
This is the cause and the reason why 1 can be known as gentle.
1:51
So I like the pseudo because it's I know from experience what is known as rough and gentle in the world is outward expression, outward forms.
But there is another suitor that says that.
2:09
Isn't it about the one monk?
Companions in the holy life like softly spoken, always pleasing, nice to be around, but of the wrong view and you should avoid them completely.
Don't have anything to do with them.
And then the alternative was like you have roughly spoken, not easy to be around, difficult, but of the right view.
2:33
And you should, you should go and be with them because that's what really matters at the end of the day.
Now of course you can have both or neither, You have softly spoken and the right view.
But the point is that the emphasis should be on whether it's the right view or not that that kind of underlines the behavior of this person.
2:57
And for that you can't just use the external appearance as a criteria.
So.
Yeah, there's this.
Yeah.
So that's the issues that people want to use external things like clothing, way of moving the body.
3:14
Exactly way of speaking uniform decorum.
Which is, again, all all fine if it's for like a, I don't know, like a social harmony.
Yeah.
You don't go and just start telling off a random stranger, you know, but somebody comes to learn the dama from you.
3:34
They're not a stranger means they want to learn.
So then if you come across like not so pleasing in your expression, and if they refuse then to hear the dama because of how you come across, well, that's their great loss.
Mm Hmm.
3:50
Because I could you read the veneer stories in the pseudonym in the Buddha was far from mildly mannered and softly spoken.
When when monks did something wrong, like the names he called them, the comparisons he drawn between them and what they did, it was quite horrific because of the weight of their actions.
4:10
It was appropriate.
He wasn't there to pat you in the back, he was there to lead you out of some sada, basically.
And you think that that can be done with just like some skillful communication and we all feel good.
No, even the world doesn't can't be solved by that because again, that's not the root of the problem.
4:30
Like if you, if your emphasis is on the level of, of how you communicate, how you come across, not why you do so.
In other words, because of greed, diversion of delusion, you'll never solve the problem, even if everybody never utters any bad words again, their intention remaining infected with with last with a version of the illusion which is sooner or later conflict will have to arise because that's the root of conflict.
4:57
So that's the problem.
Like as I said, you can whatever, learn the manners and learn how to speak properly and just it will basically 'cause you less hassle in the world.
People want want attack, you want want be against you necessarily.
But there is a limit to that.
5:15
But the problem is like if you start confusing learning a communication skill and how to express without offending anybody and so on, you start confusing that as the development in the dama that you're completely misguided.
5:32
And people do confuse that.
People are more, more, more often than not, they confuse psychotherapy and and and which is a lot revolves around learning the nonviolent communication and learning all of this.
They confuse that for the actual practice of the dama people.
They've been exposed to both.
5:48
I've seen that so many times because yes, you've actually become better in worldly terms, but no amount of you purifying your expression.
6:04
The Outward.
Shell cleaning your words up and and and perfecting your outward shell.
No amount of that would bring you any closer to a protein degree diversion, delusion.
Not an inch closer.
It will probably take you further from it because, as I said, now you're confusing a random worldly practice for the practice of the Dhamma, and because of that you won't look for what the actual practice of the Dhamma is.
6:28
And and so you can Polish your output shell all you want, but internally it's absolutely filthy.
Yeah, still.
Yeah, so you.
The Asavas are still there.
Still irritated And if you are still irritated.
6:44
That's the root of the problem.
That's the problem.
Doesn't matter how how the words you're using or how you're walking slowly and you know, doing all the externally right things, you're coming from a place of irritation.
And then the Buddha said that in that.
6:59
I don't remember this with the reference but it was basically when he said it was a perfect harmony when the community is perfectly harmonious.
Not if they learn how to talk to each other or if they never use rough words.
No, they're perfectly harmonious if they all partake in the same right view.
7:17
So Soto party is the result of harmony and see consequences.
Like like you could, you could, you could then conclude very easily that, OK, so without the right view, even if the entire community is just all smiles and happiness and nice words, that's not harmony.
7:35
That's basically circumstantial agreeability that we'll have to go break apart at some point because the route for the that division still exists.
7:51
Greed, diverse delusion, sensuality, desires.
It's the root of suffering.
So if you're not free from desires, no amount of you padding your expression and how you come across and all of that will change that.
As I said, it will factually make your life easier and it's fine to do it for that reason.
8:14
Like, you know, if you keep going around and whatever you say, people just constantly upset with you and harassing you all the time as a result of it, just on a worldly basis because of how you speak, that harassment is a nuisance.
So you just change the way you speak so they'll stop harassing you so you can then do your own thing.
8:31
But when it comes to dama, that's like, as I said, there is no room for compromise there because people are already entirely leaning away from dama with their lifestyle, with their desires, with everything else.
So now if you would not want to say what the dama is because person who asked you a question might be upset, well, you're actually that's that's quite a demeritorious act to not say what the dama is, even if they get upset.
9:00
Yeah.
As as there was a suitor on that isn't it?
Even if it upsets him, well.
Yeah, of course there is a difference between just going around and preaching and trying to convert everybody to your views and stuff.
Then people have a right to be upset, even if if if the Buddha himself is just teaching it.
9:16
The pure is Dumber.
But if a person comes to ask, comes to ask the question and and wants to hear what you have to say and then they get upset and kind of what you have to say because basically not.
And again, they will always, they will always try and I heard it many times they always try and say, oh, it's not what you said, it's how you said it.
9:37
And they just shows was basically is not you could I could say it's not what you heard, it's how you heard it.
You could say the same.
It's just blaming the other person now for it.
But the fact is, if you're honest with yourself, you would, you would recognize, hold on, yes, I'm upset.
And there is a, there is like a, there's a pressure, there is a, there's a, there's like a desire to blame it on how this person said it and how they come across.
10:03
But is that really, why am I, why am I upset?
What if they said something that I agree with and they said in the same manner, would I be upset?
Most likely not.
So the real reason I'm upset is because I don't like what I heard the message across the meaning that I obviously got enough to upset me.
10:25
I hate.
It I I.
Don't want to accept it.
Exactly.
So it's like, so then all these other reflections will come in place.
So why, why am I affected by, by by hearing this?
Why I don't like it, why I resisted?
Why, why am I irritated by it?
10:43
Because it goes against my desires or where my views are.
And it's like, well, that in and of itself, it's against the practice of the dama, you know, like that suit where that somebody was criticizing the nuns, rightly or wrongly, it doesn't matter.
I think he was wrongly actually.
10:59
He was just criticizing the nuns for wrong reasons.
And this monk there was there was their friend.
He got upset and the monk was told off by the Buddha.
He's.
Becoming too intimate.
Because he became too intimate that he got upset when somebody else was criticized, regardless of whether it was right or wrong criticism.
11:17
So that's the way.
Am I getting upset?
And you shouldn't get.
Upset you shouldn't get even if they.
Get tortured or whatever.
Well, you shouldn't get upset even if you get tortured.
Yeah, let alone if it's not you doesn't mean like you, you ignore it or you don't know what's happening, or as I said, you don't know whether the criticism is right or wrong.
11:35
No, that's all secondary.
It's more like, am I moved by this?
If so, means I'm not abandoning desire in regard to my own views.
And by doing that, by refusing to abandon it, I'm not practicing it, even if I'm claiming to practice it.
Even if you after looking like you're supporting the dumb, so like issues with like I support nuns and anyone who against nuns that's wrong and how you fight against it was like are you irritated?
11:59
Yes.
So why?
Why is that?
Because within you're you're maintaining hatred lust.
You're not supporting the dumb at all.
Is that?
So all this outward work that you're doing is actually not going to benefit.
They're done.
12:15
Yeah.
It's not exactly.
It's not going to.
It's just going to revolve around worldly things.
It's going to become a worldly thing.
Even if that was not necessarily your intentional Yeah plan.
Yeah, so I mean, yeah, people want, you know, you want to help, you want to not be hurtful to others, you.
12:32
Won't be cruel.
And so on.
Well, you don't have to take a course in nonviolent communication.
You just have to not hate them, yeah, and not be irritated by them.
Thing that was going to hurt people.
Restrain your desires, relinquish your your acquisitions and there will be no basis for you being upset or or the basis for you being upset will will shrink depending on how much you give up these things.
13:01
It's.
It is straightforward.
Is that and.
I think this, this reminded me of there's, there's these two words, aesthetic and aesthetic aesthetics.
13:17
Sure.
Aesthetics.
Yeah, aesthetic and.
Aesthetics.
I think that's the difference between there's the aesthetics, the ones who give up, lost hatred and delusion.
On the level that matters.
And then there's the aesthetics.
Aesthetics.
Who just look like they've been giving up, yeah.
They're giving it up on the level that it doesn't really matter.
13:35
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, that would kind of be all the all the, you know, the extreme self modification practices, they were completely misguided in terms of the mind and mental intention and the reasons behind which would have said they're as unbeneficial as as essential pleasures are engaging with central pleasure is so.
13:54
But yeah, you could realize you could see that.
True.
You don't even have to go to these extremes to fall into that category.
All you need to do is again, are you, are you reviewing or are you prioritizing rather, are you prioritizing your conviction that offers you security and sense of pleasure and comfort, or are you willing to, to question it?
14:25
Are you willing to, to, to really reflect upon and allow doubt to arise or allow yourself to hear things you don't want to hear?
And then if you dislike them, OK, and or so this is wrong.
If you mind saying this completely wrong, it's like, OK, it might be wrong, but now I need to understand why this which I just heard that upsets me.
14:46
It goes against what I think practice is.
That goes against what I want practice to be.
Why is it wrong?
Is it just because it goes against my desires or because I factually understand the contradiction in it?
And and then even if you understand the contradiction in it, are you relieved that that that you found the contradiction in it?
15:06
If so, means you're still investing with your desires.
Why were you threatened in the first place?
If you were so sure where the practice is, you would not have been threatened by something that was presented as as as opposed to it.
And so by not engaging in such reflections, or by not allowing that to arise, you are on the level of of self modification that just sticks to their conviction and then dismisses everything else.
15:35
Denial.
Yeah, because that's again it boils down to being free from those desires, from any desire, from any need of finding safety in the world, in the ownership, in possessions.
15:52
In views.
And if see if a person is genuinely practicing them for those reasons, they won't be deterred by the manner of speaking or the presentation because they are looking at the bigger picture, which is I'm about to die.
I might not have much time left to practice this rightly.
16:11
So please don't waste my time with poetry and and and sugar coating your expression.
Just tell me what I need to do.
Freedom from suffering.
How do I get there?
How does that come about?
You know, straight one the straight path.
Yeah.
And also, of course, as I said, you use common sense either way.
16:38
It's not to say that now you just have to tell the hard, bitter truth to everyone in the face, even if they don't ask you.
That's just dumb.
But if you know the person, if they're here to learn from your study and you're mincing words, you are doing them disservice.
16:57
That's.
Not that's not compassionate.
No, no, that's more like selfish for you because you don't wanna come across or basically you don't want to be disliked.
17:18
Let's put it that way.
Oh, if I come across like this, this person might dislike me, other person might dislike me.
That's more important to me than actually telling them what I already know that can benefit them.
But.
Then you don't really know.
You might, but you're obviously maybe not as established in it.
17:40
If re emphasize.
That if you were to prioritize that over the dama, means you need some development to do because it hasn't settled in.
Yeah.
If you if you're trying to cater your external.
OK, so yeah, for those reasons means your conceit still over shadows any understanding that you might have.
18:02
Because I've routing last hatred that that that will sort that things will work out.
You know, that's just, that's the emphasis.
Yeah, but the key is like again, when you're asked, because sometimes you can equally put people off by telling them or they don't want to hear and they didn't ask you to hear it.
18:23
No.
That's that's equally, that can be equally misguided.
Yeah.
Because sometimes people get some understanding or some sort of conviction and then they can't resist the urge to go and preach to everybody.
You know, stand on a town square and shop to everybody because this is the truth.
18:38
Nobody asked you.
Even the Buddha himself, who actually, I mean knew the clearest in all of its fastest truth, had to be asked to teach.
He wouldn't just even even to the monks a number of occasion Ananda would recognize that was Ananda skill to recognize the right time to ask the Lord for the teaching and then the wood would teach him.