0:00
It's Venerable Sister in the Middle Length discourses #3 The Buddha commends one of two monks who, upon arriving late for a meal, abstained from eating his leftovers.
Instead, he chose to go without food, following the Buddha's council to prioritize inheriting the Dumber over material possessions.
0:26
And the Buddha stated that this contented approach would ultimately benefit that monk in the long run.
But why And how does having fewer wishes aid in understanding the Dhamma?
It's basically aligning your way of living with the correct understanding of the nature of things, which is the Dhamma understanding the dama.
0:58
You can't really do it from a just a purely theoretical point of view.
The one of the first things that you have to understand if you want to start practicing, you know, you can, you can kind of get the idea of it, but there's many people who can do like APHD in the dama and but they won't really have any understanding of it.
1:21
So actually developing understanding is on the level of starting to actually align your life with those principles that are that are spoken of.
So like having fewer wishes, for example, or being content with little, not being greasy, being relatively minimalistic or having a simple life.
1:52
It's aligned with the, with the practice of Dhamma, because it's already going to be developing your mind in having less proliferation of greed, not being, not just reacting to to things that aren't exactly as you want them to be.
2:09
So like in this case, for example, that monk, he could quite well have felt justified in saying, Oh, well, I'd missed my lunch and I was, you know, and I'm hungry and now somebody's offering me food.
And but he actually chose to prioritize contentment, even whether he got what he wanted or he didn't get what he wanted.
2:36
You can see he was doing that obviously for the purpose of developing a strength of mind in the face of his own desire because, well, the basic of understanding the dama, the, you know, 4 noble truth says that the cause of any suffering whatsoever at any time is your desire.
2:55
And so if you want to actually understand that you have to start practicing towards non desire, which you know, you won't initially be able to kind of do perfectly.
But you can start by kind of limiting yourself and saying no to yourself in terms of things that you would like to go for.
3:15
And that you can say, Oh, well, is it is it really necessary?
Do I really need it?
Do I really have to have it?
Is it absolutely essential?
And so obviously that then doesn't mean that, you know, in this case it's this, this monk that day he went hungry.
3:33
And obviously in that case, it was for right reasons.
It was for to train himself in in becoming content even when, you know, when his body was hungry and putting up with that.
But then that doesn't mean that like in every case, you should always just go hungry all the time and starve yourself.
3:50
That's something to bear in mind because it's very easy then to kind of fall into the other extreme of just, you know, saying, OK, non desire and training and non desire means that like, OK, I must I must never put on a coat when I'm cold.
4:07
I must never go to sleep when I'm sleepy.
And that's not the case.
So like, it kind of depends why you're why you're doing it and what you can sort of discern are the are the correct reasons.
And in this case that monk, obviously, you know, you can kind of lean a bit towards the side of more asceticism because that will be, you know, still a bit safer than leaning towards the side of just letting yourself do whatever you want.
4:36
But at the same time, you have to be discerning that middle ground, which is the middle way.
And that's comes down again to basically under starting to understand the four noble truths.
So aligning yourselves with those 4 noble truths, the middle way being the the path or the way to actually free yourself from suffering through uprooting the the desire that is maintaining that suffering.
5:01
You need to be kind of under to training yourself in seeing where that desire is because you can't, you're not necessarily seeing it right from the beginning.
It's not really something you can just kind of get the idea of on a theoretical level because actually if you are understanding it fully, if you're to understand it properly is to be free from it.
5:24
That's what getting the right view means.
So it's it's something you have to like gradually train yourself towards and start aligning your lifestyle with.