0:07
Two things I was thinking about this week a bit.
One of them was in relation to something you mentioned or that was mentioned in the last week when we were talking about Asuba.
Because actually for me, that's one of the, that's one of the contemplations that I've always found most difficult in terms of understanding how to, how it should be done rightly.
0:36
And one of the reasons for that was because it always kind of came across as though it is supposed to be about like generating a kind of active, almost like hatred or revulsion towards the body.
0:56
And I couldn't really get the, I didn't understand the point of that or whether.
And I was not sure if it was really supposed to do that.
But then you hear it.
Like, for example, you were mentioning, like last week, the story of the monks who killed themselves because they practiced masuba.
1:17
And yet I'm not sure if that's really the point to be, like, generating almost this.
Yeah, like I said, the kind of active revulsion or disgust.
1:33
What do you mean by active?
OK, active I suppose more like.
I mean revulsion discuss is the point, but it's how you do it and on what level you do it.
Then what?
I suppose, I suppose I mean like almost an emotional reaction, whether it should be that or is it because I mean it reminded me as well of like something?
1:57
Yeah.
No, I I know what you mean.
Yeah.
And well, that's, I think in initially it will be emotional, you know, it will have to be because you the, the pathway hasn't been trained sufficiently enough.
But yes, the more correctly it is done, less emotional it is, it becomes more precise.
2:19
In other words, it starts to undermine only the lustful parts, only the parts that you're attracted that that you grip with attract that's undermined by lust, by, by Asuba, that last is undermined by it not, not everything else.
2:34
So you, you're not emotionally overwhelmed or disgusted with everything and nothing and so on.
So think about it, a very specific food that you really want to eat and you see no reason to not eat that.
I mean, there are plenty of other food, but you have no desire towards it.
2:51
You could eat it, it would have the same end result feeding your body but particular type of food and you can say no to it of course each time and and not eat it, but you still remain attracted to it.
3:09
So then if you were to do a suba or correctly, you would be finding ways through contemplation how to undermine that specific desire towards that specific food.
3:27
And you wouldn't have to hate all the food and you wouldn't have to be emotionally disgusted with eating altogether.
Just this particular consumption of this particular food.
You find disgust.
You have to find disgust in it.
3:43
So it's not just convincing yourself to not eat it.
You actually have to undermine desire and discussed in regard to the thing you desire is what undermines the desire.
So there is the active discussed, but it's not everywhere and nowhere, which it might be initially.
4:01
Which is why those monks did kill themselves because they got overwhelmed because they did not apply it where it's supposed to.
Precisely enough, OK.
4:24
That makes sense.
Because to think about it, there is your your favorite plate with a favorite food on it.
And then you find out somebody's patting it or worse.
Would you have desire to eat that thing on the plate right in front of you?
Still the same look, still the same smell, still the same taste.
4:41
You probably wouldn't taste someone else's fluids in it, but would you eat it now that you know that you'll be quite disgusting.
And if somebody to put it in your mouth, that food, you will be like spitting it out, disgusted.
If you were to have to swallow it, you would be disgusted at any part of involvement with that food.
4:57
That disgust would be there as a as a framework of it, because now you know what's in it, OK?
So, yeah, but that's, that's quite a good, it is quite a good example because it's like that makes sense because the disgust basically only it's like, yes, I would be disgusted in terms of OK, yeah, I'm not eating that.
5:17
I don't want to eat it.
I don't want to go nearer.
But that's where it ends basically.
Then you don't need to kind of.
Go and carry that disgust.
With you, I don't know, like.
You know, no, no, if you do means you don't quite still see the basis where that last is.
Because then it's like if you're kind of going on about how disgusting it is, it's like there's no need to.
5:36
It's just OK, I just don't need to touch it.
I don't need to be.
Involved so the disgust would be evoked.
If there is a careless mental tendency towards eating it, then you'll get reminded of the disgust implicit.
But obviously initially the whole picture is perverted.
5:52
It's upside down.
You start with the desire, you start with the attraction, and then disgust has to be kind of contemplated into it.
So to then become the normal, like natural, natural, kind of the first thing you would see if you were to engage with it would be discussed as opposed to attraction, which was before the case, like oh, I want this.
6:14
And then, Oh no, it's ugly, it's disgusting.
And then you work and then you work, but no, this comes up or it's the disgust comes up.
And so then that's like, because in terms of then how like how I relate to the body, for example, in general, OK, if I need to go to the toilet, I need to go to the toilet.
6:34
If I need to wash it, it needs to be washed.
I need to kind of engage with it to a certain extent.
But then.
So when would then, if you were to contemplate discussed rightly?
When would that?
When would then discussed arise in regard to your own body?
6:54
For seeing it like if seeing it as a I don't know an object of attraction.
OK, Yeah.
Sexual attraction for.
Example sexual attraction.
OK.
Or in terms of, I don't know, like if somebody wants to decorate it.
Or yeah, if you were to take it as a as a thing of beauty to be displayed externally or for.
7:15
Others.
Or something if you were to use it as a basis for pleasure in.
General.
Yeah, that disgust can undermine that as well.
But if the mind stops going in those directions, there is no discuss to be certainly to be there like to be felt.
7:35
And you, that's what I mean.
Like you can engage with this without in, in, in those kind of neutral ways.
Yeah, without.
The ways that are not sexual, not vain, not about beautification, not about gaining pleasure through the body, admire being admired on the kind of physical that that's also again that will be undermined by the disgust by Azuba.
8:01
Or even like, not, not necessarily like I want to be admired by others as a kind of a, as a human being in terms of being seen in a certain way by other.
I think even that would be kind of undermined, no by because it's all kind of on the basis of this well bag of gums.
8:21
Yeah.
I mean, yeah, sure you could.
You could.
8:39
Yeah.
And I guess the other thing that at least in the past was not really clear is like we're clear for me was how to, because it's often spoke about in in terms of like how to practically go about doing it.
8:56
Let's say like how to you how how do you contemplate a suba?
And it's especially when it comes to like then I don't know, there's this list of like internal organs.
And yeah, I.
Don't know.
To me, my mind, I think of an internal organ and my mind just is like, you know, it's just.
Something on the, I think for most people, that's what it is because that's why like when you look at these super contemplations done as methods and techniques, they just become these kind of empty recital of these visualized sort of abstract ideas that then people kind of implicitly hope will somehow 'cause passion to disappear from me.
9:32
And, and even like just just looking at the Asuba pictures and contemplating like, you know, in the suitors, contemplate the bodies on the channel ground and stuff.
You realize even that you might get that initial shock, but then you get used to it, you overcome it and you stop seeing it.
9:48
And then the lust is back.
And then now you're just, you're just numb to, to these, these shocking contemplations and sights and sounds and smells and so on.
Because if you're just applying it kind of as a, as a, as a blanket practice that you then, but you don't see the relationship between that and the actual lost and attraction when it is present.
10:14
It's not going to work because because you, you're not making the, the necessary connection between the two.
So practically, you want to, you want to contemplate a suba, as I said first.
Well, in order to make the connection so that the Super can be applied rightly on the things that can be undermined by it, you need to stop just habitually trying to get rid of those things when they arise.
10:40
So if you do have a desire for a food on the plate, yes, you can't just start eating it.
So you have to restrain.
That also means you need to stop looking at it, smelling it, holding it, bringing it close to your face and so on.
10:57
Whatever you would.
But I'm not eating.
Yeah, but you're doing everything else around it.
So you need to withdraw your senses from it.
And then the mental pressure on account of that desire, that's what you can, you have to endure now, rightly without going back to these objects.
So if that endurance is done sufficiently, then you get to recognize.
11:19
OK, So it's this desire even I'm.
I'm away from the the plate of food that's still on my mind mentally, it's still there.
That's what I need to answer.
I do want it.
So how do I make myself not wanted?
But that can be only done correctly if you are first withdrawn from it with your senses.
11:42
Because if you are not, doesn't matter what you're contemplating, your senses still keep you connected to it in that wrong way through the desire.
So if somebody's withdrawn and it's not going back to it by sight, sound, smell, taste, touches to the the most desirous thing, then recognizes that he wants it.
11:58
OK, how do I undermine the want?
Well, by taking the same images of this desirous thing and basically contemplating into them a non desiring aspect which is there of the same thing, not something else within that same thing, you want it.
12:18
You have to find the aspects of the same thing that are not wanted.
So at the same time you do have this desire that you are then actively undermining through the contemplation of that same thing, aspects of the same thing that are factually not desirable.
So if there is an attraction to a body through the pleasure that you can get through the body, you can't just get rid of this.
12:42
I'll replace you with the disgust and just just look at this and get this shock effect and then I'll stop thinking about it.
That won't work.
You will work initially.
Novelty will run off and you're back to where started.
Plus now you think a super doesn't work.
So you when you recognize that desire, if it's endured and you're not trying to get rid of it, you do find factual disgusting aspects of the same body and leave them there with the desire.
13:07
Don't try to force the desire out with by by by pushing it out with these other now contemplated aspects.
Just leave the disgust, however faint it might be.
Leave it there with the desire.
It will neutralize it.
13:24
And that's the point.
That's like finding the balance, tuning it rightly, because again, if you, you do recognize that the the disgusting parts and now you want to force them even quicker to get rid of the desire, but you'll be doing that through the desire.
So you kind of fail from the middle ground, from the middle way and that's it.
13:44
And now you realize in the in the broad terms, whenever there is attraction to the body, at the same time, there will be a, an aspect that is factually non attractive simultaneous with it.
And that's what you get to see.
14:01
And then all you need to do is attend to the aspect that's that's, that's not attractive and refuse to attend to the aspect that's attractive.
Both are in your mind simultaneously present, but you do not attend to those that are agreeable.
You attend to the factually disagreeable and that's it.
14:18
And if there is an impulse to do it hard to do more of it, to do it quicker.
Well, you also refrain from the Naples, just attend it rightly and leave it there.
It will do its work.
Because that's the thing like I would say, I mean it's kind of a common thread with nearly all of the the hindrances.
14:40
But like say this, the the aspects that are non desirable are not something that requires your input to keep feeding them.
They're just there on the exactly whereas and it's the exact opposite with.
14:56
The well, they need to be discerned there on the from the thing.
And that's only like you have to start enduring that thing on that desire on the mental level first, because that's where you're going to find these non attractive aspects of it.
If you are refusing to endure it and then seeking the non attractive aspects, they're all going to be rooted in a version towards this.
15:16
I would just want to get rid of this thing and it's not going to work.
But if it's endured correctly without, as I said, blindly aversive trying to just get rid of desire because it's painful.
15:33
No bear the pain.
And then the the the aspects of the factory are not attractive.
You know you're supposed to look for them.
Now you can look in that very desire while desire is pressuring you.
That's fine.
All I need to do is not go back to sights and smell taste touches associated with it.
15:52
This pressure can go forever as far as I'm concerned.
It can't make me ACT unless I choose to.
Yes, it's unpleasant.
While that's there, you start to look at the factually disgusting aspects of the same very thing, discerning them because they are there.
16:09
So while you're pressured to consume that plate, you're discerning that somebody is constantly spitting in it and then have but there is still desire to eat it.
You still feel that hunger, but you remain attending to the knowledge that somebody's pat in it, that that it's that it's contaminated, that it is soiled and you will lose desire towards it.
16:31
Not overnight, but you don't have to worry about it.
That's what I meant.
Like it's not like it's something you have to notice basically these these non desirable aspects, not something that you have to necessarily, I think be like if you're kind of creating, trying to create it and fabricate it, that's going to be that I think.
17:02
Is that kind of what you meant by?
Yeah, if you try to fabricate it coming out of the aversion towards the the pressure of desire, it's not going to work.
And there is you, those aspects, everybody knows that usually you find them after you try to satisfy your desires, then you're discussed because you're over 8.
17:22
So people experience discussed in regard to the same things they're attracted to, they just don't know how to experience it at the same time.
So we're back on to that practice of simultaneity again.
You get the desire, you're not trying to get rid of it.
You just try to bring out a broader context of disgust while desire is pressuring you and leave it there.
17:42
Leave that balance there lasting because many people would have experienced something they really want and then get it and then Oh well, that was it.
Or or even worse, they, they, they go through greater lengths to to obtain what they want to consume what they want to, to to sight, sound, smell, taste, touches, and then they burn out all their effort and then they have it and then they discussed it with it discussed it with themselves.
18:10
They just feel like, oh, this is depressing, but they feel it after.
So next time the desire comes, they're going to seek it again because they won't be making the effort to bring up the factual disgusting aspects of their thing that they have experienced after desire would have subsided and bring it together at the same time while the pressure is there.
18:31
No, because pressure being uncomfortable will kind of make them lose perspective out of aversion to try to get rid of that discomfort and pain.
And that's that practice in the suit to describe he doesn't grasp the signs and the features that would be incisive of lust and taking that direction.
18:54
Yeah.
So you do have the desire, you do have the pressure, you're having images in your mind and that's where you're making that choice.
Am I allowing and grasping signs and features that are associated with desire and attractive aspects, or do I refuse to basically allow my mind to to dwell on those and proliferate, but instead are feeding the context of the discussed in regard to the same desire that still felt that I'm not just trying to get rid and replace with with a through a random practice of meditation method or technique.
19:29
And that's why the organs and so on, because if they're seen on that level, like as a simultaneous thing, phenomena present there with the desire towards the thing that's comprised of those organs, then it will be, it will be very efficient.
It won't be disturbed like yes, kidney, liver, lungs, as people just recite magically like a magical mantra.
19:52
No, it will be, oh, a bag of skin.
So it doesn't matter how specific your desire might have been, how strong, this completely kind of just deflates it if sustained long enough.
And also those organs listed.
20:08
They are pretty much universal to anything, any anybody, yours or others, any desire involved in between the two.
So it doesn't matter the occasion doesn't matter the specific scenario, liver, kidney, brain, bile, urine, pus, skin, hair, it's there has to be there as a necessary basis.
20:28
So but I I desired it.
Yes, there is a desire towards the specific form that those things have taken.
Now bring up the aspects of those things that are there.
Bring up the aspects of of, of.
Yeah, just imagine holding a kidney or a or a bloody lung in your hand.
20:46
It's like, oh, OK, put it simultaneously there.
Don't try to replace one with the other and leave that set up there.
So then the discussed will work to the extent that it needs to work.
21:04
You know, it's like trying to neutralize acid with alkaline, alkaline with neutral only.
If you neutralize only acid part, acid drops, you pour the alkaline, it will only react with the parts of the acid.
You're not going to react with other things.
You're not going to destroy everything else.
And then you can just wash everything away.
21:22
It reminds.
Me a bit of there's this one of the verses I really like in the Teri Gatta from the nuns where so it's like the nun is walking in the forest or something and some guy comes and is like, I don't know, harassing her and so on and say, oh, come with me, come and marry me and you'll be dressed and find clothes and everything and leave this house as life.
22:06
And she asks him, what?
What do you what do you find so attractive in this in this body, in this microphone?
He's oh, your eyes, your eyes are like a dough, so beautiful and so on.
Oh, really?
OK, so it's my eyes you want.
And then she takes out the eye.
22:23
And so here you go.
And so, and he was shocked and disgusted and.
He was shocked and disgusted.
Like so it's the same of like you were saying, it's the same thing, but like in and of itself nobody wants it.
Yeah, exactly.
22:45
Like it's the form and the shape where the attraction rests in and of itself that which makes that shape and form.
It's like, oh, but that's not seen at the same time.
And also like a person doesn't need to go and actively seek out the attraction to practice a super in regard to it.
23:14
Because if you have not, well, if you're not free from passion means even without any specific things coming up, your mind coming up like sort of like desire taking over your mind, even without any specific sight, sound, smell, taste, statue or image, you are within that domain.
23:33
So in other words, you do carry that basis for attraction with you.
You don't go around and when you see the body, when the body pops up, do you first see the disgusting aspect naturally or do you first see the attractive aspect naturally?
Well if it's not the the former means you do carry your last with you.
23:53
So then you could start practicing this asuba anytime on that right level.
Like he does not require a specific arousal or desire or this to counter it.
Like fundamentally you go around carrying a view that bodies are not disgusting.
24:13
That's that's the first thing you see.
Then you try to see the Azuba and so on.
But for as long as that order is not changed up, whereby the view is that the bodies are disgusting as in like not just intellectual idea, but when the bodies are experienced in the way that could be provocative of desire, well, it's provocative of disgust, not desire.
24:38
Same like you would not be disgusted with the thing that's on the plate that you don't deem edible, but if somebody offers you to eat it then you're like whoa, no now, now it's now.
It's genuinely disgusting because you brought up that context.