0:00
Arjun, I diligently observe the 8 precepts and I believe I'm putting in sincere effort.
However, a persistent thought troubles me, the notion that using or having money might impede my progress or purity.
0:16
Why is refraining from money one of the higher precepts?
The the 10 precepts though, how does abstaining from it contribute to spiritual freedom?
What's inherently wrong with money because as long as I I use it for good and refrain from harmful actions?
0:36
And could money be a hindrance to awaken?
In a in short, no, of course not.
No, it was a, it was a practical reason for that precept when the, when the order grew, basically you, you know, like you have monks on their own ordaining here and there to various teachers living roughly travelling around, having access to money meant having access to central things.
1:05
If that's where the mind turned, their mind would turn to words.
So it was, it was a, a, a, a practical rule to prevent the temptations for new monks, for monks that are not developed, for monks that are not established in virtue.
Because even today as well, you can think about it like if you were to have your own money without any supervision, without anybody else knowing how it's being spent, if the mind is not developed, you might give in to desires and get this or get that.
1:35
But that's again, if you're not developed, if you're not interested in practice, if you're slacking, if you're, if you're regressing.
So in a similar fashion, it was like a, you know, the rule about not storing food.
Again, it was for those who are not developed to prevent them from kind of going LAX and and proliferating towards sensuality, not because it's in and of itself an impediment for enlightenment.
2:00
I mean Arahan broke that rule.
He was in Arahan who was storing food not because out of desire or craving, but because the village was too poor and they couldn't they they were still feed him but he felt bad for taking food every day because they don't have enough for themselves.
So if he had the leftover, he would put it aside to eat next day.
2:17
So he doesn't take it from them.
But then the Buddha said, no, it's an offence you got to convey because again, from a practical standpoint of an managing the order of monks, it could give rise that allowance to like many monks, they were not Arkansas and they're not developed.
2:33
Could basically because of that start slacking and so on.
So the money was the same.
He said who has access to money, has access to the five codes of sensuality.
And you know, back in the day, like you could have engaged with those things without anybody ever knowing because there was so many different summoners, different dramas, different types.
2:52
Somebody had money, somebody not nobody would have batted an eyelid, so to speak.
So they would have made that rule just to prevent those who are not developed, who are still in training to, to kind of fall into that trap.
So basically it applies to the monks.
So if you have withdrawn yourself from everything else, given up the household life, having that kind of direct unchecked access to money can become the impediment there, there and then.
3:18
But if you're a householder, keeping the precepts, 8 precepts, great practicing within that.
Again, if you keep the precepts, no amount of money can become an obstacle for you unless you break the precepts through money, unless you start or sense restraint.
3:35
If you are well restrained, restraining your senses, this training you're craving, again, no amount of gold or money can make you lose that perspective.
But as I said, as if you are like from the standpoint of managing an order, if something like that happens, you have to look at the bigger picture and then say, I know because again, for most of these new monks or something, it could result in issues.
3:58
So let's just not even go there.
But this is not that.
It's not the same context, It's not the same.
It's not the same starting point.
What about that whole, you know, once if you have money, OK, you have access to central pleasures of all kinds, but you, you also or some people would have a sense of control, of safety.
4:22
Of safety, yeah, well, yeah, but see that's money.
Just reveals that I was going to.
I was going to say that next.
So if that person who asked the question, I don't know if they're a monk or a layman, basically if they're a monk, presumably a layperson.
Yeah.
So money would not be an obstacle for our handship.
4:38
How being a householder would be an obstacle for our handship.
But again, if you're not even a Sotabana or Anagami from from that point of view, I wouldn't worry about obstacle, last obstacle for our handship, develop everything else that you can as opposed to now taking too much and not even doing the first step properly.
5:01
And that's the reason why, as I said, money would reveal that sense of control, sense of control that's inherently bound with a house for life.
I come as I please, I go as I please.
I'm my own boss.
Nobody tells me what to do.
Nobody tells me how to walk, how to talk, how to eat, how to carry my ball, how to relate to people.
5:19
I can just do what I want because I'm an individual.
I have my own place, my own apartment, my own house.
I'm my own boss.
And that inherently is bound with the sense of control and sense of safety that comes on counter.
That's why a lame and cannot become an utter hunt from that point of view.
5:34
Not because it's so magical energy preventing him, but because to that degree, he's still not relinquishing that sense of control that's founded upon his sense of I am.
So it's not like I need to magically put the ropes on in order to become another.
And then no, I need to relinquish the household life regardless of what I wear.
5:53
I need to relinquish that fundamental control that I've been living through my whole life.
And that's really the issue then, not the money.
So if you're keeping the 8 presets and are diligent in regard to it and diligent in sense restraint, develop the right view, free yourself from sensuality within that money will then just be a practical tool you're using for survival 'cause you're not, you're not going around on pentapad or getting food by donors and so on.
6:23
And then like, if you want to really become an out of hunt and you don't have anybody depending on you in your life, they would die if you leave and so on how it was back in the suitors, then go for today and give up the money as well.
And there you go.
But now it's like worrying about what type of car do I have when you haven't even found a horse.
6:46
So it's it's, you know, one step at a time.