0:02
I was wondering if we could talk about a Nietzsche once again it's.
Been a while.
Yeah, and I found some suitors pointed out by another friend which shows where the how to develop or where that perception of a Nietzsche should be developed, how it should be developed.
0:31
What's the importance of it said?
Because there are these three things, the view of satisfaction, the view of self and wrong view, and these other three things are to be developed for abandoning those three things.
0:52
The perception of impermanence is to be developed for abandoning, abandoning the view of satisfaction.
So that's the perception the Nietzsche is to be developed, to abandon the view that things are satisfying.
1:07
Yeah, yeah.
So I have a view that this is satisfying.
My situation is great.
I like, you know, my, my body is good.
It's working.
It's I'm satisfied.
My life, my family, my views, my convictions are satisfying to me.
1:30
Yeah, that's why like, when is this others have to say like, you know when someone is in Brahmins leave withdrawn from sensuality physically, but then they start falling into views, like really start holding the views 'cause that becomes where they find their safety and satisfaction and comfort in their convictions.
1:50
So, yeah, you could see like what we said that before, I think obviously in many other talks, a Nietzsche needs to be can only be understood on that personal level.
So when you find things that are dear to you and contemplate their cessation or change the feeling that you get as a result of it, well, that's the closest to a Nietzsche you can get in the beginning.
2:14
And that's the direction to go.
But the problem is obviously with like a, you know, contemporary Buddhism, the the whole kind of mass of commentaries and like a scholarly interpretation of terminologies and so on.
It's not paired with the fundamental practice and the right view.
2:33
Then you get these ideas of the scientific that that things are constantly changing and that's why they're not real.
And that's why Duca is not real.
But you realize, well then the Buddha would have simply said that he said everything is constantly changing and none of your pain is real and nothing is ever real.
2:54
But he didn't, he said, contemplating permanence to overcome satisfaction, to abandon satisfaction in things, in Dumas, in views, in possessions.
And you could realize anybody can adopt the view.
3:12
Any scientists who is measuring sort of physicists or whatever that it's measuring data, measuring things called measuring electrons constantly moving would say, oh, things are constantly changing.
Anybody can develop that view.
Anybody can adopt that view.
No prerequisites needed.
3:28
You just need to hear it and need to be pleased about it and that's it.
You don't need to endure anything.
You don't need to keep the precepts.
You don't need to.
Well, you don't need to abandon safety that you find in the world and all the satisfaction.
3:43
You just adopt the view that everything is constantly changing.
And yeah, often people like that people that follow commentaries and and kind of contemporary interpretations would often try and connect and say, yes, of course, modern science has proven that everything is constantly changing And see, the Buddha also said that.
4:00
So the modern science has proven that the Buddha was right as if such thing is possible.
But Tujhana can prove an Ararat right.
That's just insane or so.
So the whole, the whole idea of like things constantly changing and everything is constant flux and it is linear.
4:18
A leads to B leads to C leads to D and that's how everything is going and moving in one to the next.
And that's when nothing is real.
That's when nothing is permanent.
That doesn't require anything.
Nor would that view uproot your satisfaction in the world.
4:34
You would not make a difference.
You would just provide a, a new gloss, the latest veneer of of kind of hindsight interpretation of what it is.
But things can never be experienced like that.
Like if things are constantly changing second to second, you would not be self-conscious being they would be a no steady at reference point.
4:53
That's not as changing as much.
You would simply be swept from A to B&C and they will be no, they would not even be a notion of memory.
So the whole point is and see like again, when people adopt that view, although they might draw it from from science or from whatever commentary explanation and so on.
5:20
It's not it does not remain just male intellectual.
There is the whole kind of emotional side invested in that because people would have arrived at the Buddhist teaching because they want to be free from suffering.
But then they jumped into this view that then, as I said, retroactively describes what happens to you, which is why nothing is real, which is why you don't suffer, and then they get emotionally invested in that.
5:49
Because they are.
Suffering, well, yes, because basically they want to be free from suffering, so they want to be free from suffering.
So they invest in this explanation that tells them that the suffering is not real because everything is constantly changing.
So it's not going to be easy for them to then just drop that view because that means now they have to drop the whole idea of practice, the whole idea of that kind of relief that they got from the belief that their suffering is not real.
6:17
But that is necessary if they were to actually start to understand the endurance.
Because you know, when the Buddha described there is there is a rising is manifest, ceasing is manifest and persisting while changing is manifest, the three characteristics.
So persisting or changing means exactly that, persisting as the same thing while changing on a different level.
6:39
And you realize everything, everything.
So it's like my intention to sit here and talk to you.
He remains persisting because if I change my mind, I'll get up and walk out.
So all these other things that are constantly changing, my arms are moving, my my mouth is moving and speaking, different sounds are coming out, different questions, different ideas.
7:00
All of that is on a lower level.
So that is changing, while my intention to remain seated talking to you is not changing.
And if you were to say, well, that intention to remain seated here and talk to you, well that's just an idea.
That's just, well, it is an idea.
7:17
It's an image.
It's really such.
And furthermore, if there is a not idea in my mind to sit here and talk to you, none of these smaller things that I do would be intelligible.
They would make no sense because there would be no unifying idea.
There would be no idea that persists while these things within that idea are changing.
7:38
So that's the whole point.
Then a person, if they were to, if they were to basically overcome their scientific view of everything, is in a constant flux and changing from A to B to C, and that's nothing is real.
And you just sent the concepts they like from from where they're standing when they hear the the third characteristic that they would have talked about persisting while remaining the same, sorry, changing while remaining the same or persisting while changing depending on translation that would to them feel like eternity.
8:06
Look like that's permanent, but that's all that's permanent is like, well, yeah.
So first you have to now adopt the idea that things are permanent and see how that feels and then start seeing.
8:22
OK, but that permanence is not mine.
It's not for me, it's not I am.
And that's the closest that's much closer to the impermanence, the actual and each of the can come.
So it's not about denying things, it's about removing your satisfaction and sense of safety that's found in them.
8:44
So ironically enough, the view that everything is constantly changing moment to moment, flux consciousness just coming and going, coming and going is obviously a thing that's not changing.
Their view is, is is is not changing on that level.
And that's the that's basically where they find satisfaction in that explanation of how things are, of what's happening to me, of why my suffering is not real.
9:11
And if I stick to it, all the concepts will just disappear in my mind and I'll be left with the pure reality was like, well, pure reality is just another concept you just used.
And the concepts were never the problem.
That's again what the Buddha said himself.
As far as the language goes, as far as the words and designations go, that's how far the Takata has explained the dhama.
9:33
There's no issue.
There's no no need to say our words are just mere concepts.
There is a real reality which you just expressed through words, which is a mere concept, which means real reality is just mere concepts.
Then as well, how can you possibly perceive anything that would not involve a notion of a concept of it?
9:51
And he said as far as the designation goes, as far as Namaroopa goes, as far as the words and language goes, the target has understood it and explained it.
That's it.
Not, not less, not more than that.
If somebody claims that there is more that they can explain, more than your language can convey or or less, they don't know what they're talking about.
10:14
That's not possible, he said.
Such thing is not possible.
So if somebody wants to contemplate a Nietzsche exactly find things, experiences in your life that you are finding satisfaction in, they're satisfying for you that you find safety in all of that and see it really such.
10:39
There is no reason to deny it.
There is no reason to to to undermine it with his explanatory views all but that's not real because electrons are constantly moving and and collapse or whatever else.
No, no, no, it's really such.
Otherwise you wouldn't be finding safety in it.
So what's the problem then?
10:56
Oh, the problem then is when you reflexively recognize your situation.
Oh, I am finding safety, say like the typical example would be I'm finding safety in my family.
My family is my satisfaction.
Things that work for things that produce things that have that is my satisfaction.
11:16
But then if you are honest and you recognize that your satisfaction rests upon these things that are fundamentally not in your control, and then you feel anxiety, then you feel the dread, then you feel, what if I lose these things or suffering?
11:32
How do I free from suffering?
Well, you could go the route of, as I said, commentarial ideas.
They had nothing to do with the early texts.
They were introduced much later of deny the reality of of those things.
Say your son, your daughter, they're not real.
They're just electrons and stuff and, and, and hammer in that until you kind of deny any dependence on it while you still dependent on it.
11:56
Because no amount of saying it's just electrons would make you not feel suffering if you were to lose them there and then in hindsight, then you would explain that that wasn't suffering.
It was just this.
But first and foremost, you will feel it or go the route that actually the Buddha said you should go if you want to prove the suffering.
12:15
Recognize that your satisfaction, your safety depends upon those things that are not in your control.
Allow that feeling to endure.
How can mind endure that feeling of what if I lose everything that's dear to me through purification of virtue?
12:32
So through sense restraint and virtue, your mind becomes stronger and is able to endure such anxious thoughts and possibilities and then gets to see them.
Even the dearest of those things, the dearest of assumptions, the dearest of perceptions that I had have, cannot be owned in and of itself.
12:50
It is UN honorable.
Mine doesn't move in face of it.
Mine is not afraid from it anymore.
What if I better stop thinking about it?
I better either explain that they're not real or distract myself from it.
No, you remain with those things presently enduring for you.
So that pressure, those feelings, the anxiety, what if I lose things that I love, that remains there and the mind stops fighting them, stops trying to, to, to sort of deny them or stop, stop trying to look away.
13:21
And then you get to see, well, it has a reason on its own.
Even the notion of attachment as such, it's not in my control as such.
It is impermanent, whatever has come to be because it's there, that is its impermanence.
13:38
Its manifestation is its own ability because you, you didn't create things, you just find them presented to you.
Then you get attached and everything else, sure, but all that secondary to their manifestation.
So that's the sort upon is understanding whatever is of the nature to manifest.
13:58
It's because of that manifestation that it's impermanent, not because I will observe its ending.
And that's also another problem with that whole commentator.
And this notion of, of, of like things constantly in the flux of change means you need to observe things, change things ending to know the impermanence.
14:18
But that doesn't apply to any things of the personal matter.
How can you observe your life ending?
So in other words, if you want to understand the commentarial type of impermanence, you need to die because you're still alive.
Your life is still here, enduring.
14:37
It's not ending.
So how can you then be free from the five aggregates in samsara?
Because by that view, the ending means you need to observe it gone.
But that's impossible.
So quite the opposite.
A Nietzsche does not require things to disappear, it actually requires them to be there.
14:56
That's where the sought upon his understanding is whatever is of the nature to manifest, that's why it's impermanent.
Not whatever was on the nature to be here and it's now gone.
That's why it's impermanent.
No, no, no, whatever's here because it's here.
That's why it's unknownable.
15:12
That's why it's impermanent.
It's of of the nature.
So actually you should practice impermanence before things change and disappear.
Yeah, because if you don't.
Well, exactly.
You won't see it.
You you're attached to those things that you find satisfaction in.
15:28
Yeah, because you don't see the nature of being subject to change.
Subject to change while not changing.
Yeah, that's the point, yeah.
So you have something that you're attached to, your family, whatever your possessions, your view.
15:47
Your views, the satisfaction and safety you get on account of view that explains how everything happens, how everything ties in.
Yet that is, again, you find safety in it.
And that's why people would hold such views.
16:04
Oh, this leads to that, leads to that.
That's always people want to understand things that happened to them, especially things that cause suffering.
Like I want to know why it happened.
Why did he say such and such thing?
Why did she do such and such thing?
And having to like having some sort of retroactive kind of in hindsight, extra information feels like, OK, I understood it.
16:27
I'm fine now, but as the Buddha said, that's completely wrong way to go about it.
You get shot by an arrow instead of trying to figure out why he shot you.
What was his clan?
What was his reason?
What did I do to him?
You put all those questions aside and says get this arrow out because I'll die.
16:49
But the foolish man does not let the doctor get the arrow out.
In other words, he doesn't do the gradual training here and now to get the arrow out until he has all these answers first met.
Why and how and what led to this and how it led to B and all of that.
And you know, Oh yeah.
17:05
Because those those views, those information that you collect provides you sense of safety.
You find you derive satisfaction from it to the point that it it does actually alleviate suffering.
You know, somebody said something.
So hurtful to you.
Manage.
Somebody something said so hurtful to you and it's like you just, it's just, you don't know how to deal with that pain.
17:26
But then you find out that that person was in pain, they lost some and suddenly you're not in pain.
It's like, well, you haven't free yourself from suffering.
You just managed it.
Exactly.
You just changed its form, but you remain equally liable to somebody else saying something hurtful.
17:43
So that means what?
Every time you need to find out what's your claim, why you shot me, Why did you show somebody else?
What did I do to you every single time?
And you will run out of time.
Sooner or later you will run out of time.
Your view that things are permanent makes you feel good.
18:00
You know, like my.
Family.
Well, yeah, you.
Don't want to think about?
It, it's not an explicit like, oh, I feel so, but it, it makes you feel that safety deep down.
And that's exactly what what the suitor says, what it says contemplate change.
So you stop assuming permanence in things that are dear to you.
18:18
You stop assuming that things won't change.
That's it.
Because no matter how satisfying anything is, so just keep going on family, say attachment to family or friend, no matter how satisfying it is, still it's of the nature, yes, on the basis of it is subject to change.
18:35
That's its nature.
So can I Is that satisfying?
That is going to be taken away at any moment?
Well, and that's the thing you don't need to have your family taken away.
If you contemplate subject to change in face of things that you don't want to change your emotionally invested for them not changing.
18:55
You contemplate change, you realize your family would still remain there.
You don't need to get rid of them.
You know you don't need to have them arrested or taken away.
What will what will disappear is that layer of satisfaction and kind of comfort that you are finding in it.
19:11
That's that's the only thing that would disappear.
But obviously for somebody who is not doing that practice, that is the that is the framework of everything else, everything they experience in regards to the family and so on is 1st through satisfaction, first through comfort, 1st through ownership.
19:28
So that's why it's scary to contemplate these things, not because thinking that your family subject to change will make it then disappear this instant, but it will make your satisfaction and safety and everything else built on it.
It will make that disappear in an instant.
Then what am I left with?
19:45
Yeah, non satisfaction.
Well then you left with the actual Nietzsche.
Yeah, and then you have a choice as the people in the suitors had the choice.
OK, either I will recognize this and allow it to permeate my being, whereby I will not remain attached to anything that requires my gratuitous assumption of non changing because such thing is not possible.
20:06
Things are subject to change means eventually they will be taken away.
That's the whole point.
So so the only reason, the only way someone could suffer in regard to having lost a something that they were attached to.
20:25
Is if they were finding satisfaction and safety satisfaction, I think.
They weren't seeing a Nietzsche.
So then you can ask yourself like if presumably you know because you read the suitors you're familiar with, you have some ideas of a Nietzsche and practice.
So ask yourself like, do your ideas of an Icha, do they make you feel anxious?
20:48
Do they make you feel like there's nothing that you can find satisfaction and safety?
Or do you not even feel any of that?
Everything just fits, fits into place.
Just everything is neatly explained in hindsight how everything happens and it's all fine.
And then see, see which, which one of those is you basically.
21:09
And if you read the SUTA that you just read, you realize which one you should be.
Because if those views of Anita were right, you will be free from any, any seek, any of satisfaction, any, any, any, any safety in the world, any ownership if a niche is fully developed so.
21:27
And and because.
And also you can ask yourself like, would you be free from assumptions, ownership, who padanas, finding satisfaction, finding safety and things?
21:44
Would you be free from all of that without needing to constantly rehash and rehearse the explanation?
They tell you how everything happens.
So when things arise, are you free or?
You have to tell yourself.
Nothing's really.
Or do you have to go through the motions.
21:59
They then free you from things that have a reason.
It means you're not free, you're just managing.
That's it.
So there I find I find something in my life which I find satisfaction in that is dear to me I'm attached to.
22:19
And then you contemplate that that thing is subject to change and you feel anxiety, which means.
You're attached exactly so anxiety is not a problem.
As I said so many times, it's a symptom.
22:35
So if you contemplate change in things that you deem dear to you that you don't want to change and you feel anxiety, that anxiety directly corresponds to the to the, to the degree of your attachment to those things to, to the degree of your retreaters assumption of non change.
22:51
So you realize, OK, so anxiety shows me what I'm doing wrong.
I stop having those notions through diligent contemplation of impermanence.
Anxiety will disappear and the diligent contemplation of impermanence is not you're going through the random motions and so on.
23:09
It's through allowing your thought that this will change, allowing it to endure, not, not seeking to explain and get rid of it.
So you find things that are dear to you, then you contemplate that they will change.
You think about it, you reflect on that, then you have that anxiety and then you leave that enduring anxiety in regard to your thoughts of things that are dear to me that I assume they will not change, are subject to change, and just leave it.
23:36
And even if the anxiety disappears, you leave that only when you get completely distracted, forget you bring it back up.
I need to qualify that because people would think then also then I just have to go through these mental exercises and methods of just repeating mantra to myself that everything.
23:51
You got to see and each and.
You exactly exactly exactly you need to you need to get that sense of all this is subject to change.
This is an honorable everything that I'm, everything that exists from me in regard to it, ownership, satisfaction, all of that.
24:09
All of that is contingent upon my assumption of non change of that thing.
But I have no control over it, which means my idea of non change is ridiculous.
This is fully encapsulated in its own nature that is subject to change.
24:26
And let that endure.
Let their thoughts sit at the back of your mind throughout your day that things are subject to change, nothing else, and then protect it through virtue and guarding of the sense.
Those who are not distracted and fall back on to finding satisfaction in things you're.
You're being enamored with things, the lighting things that gets removed.
24:47
That Withers away.
Yeah, that will wither away.
Because you can't find the light in something which is and it's called dangerous to you.
Yeah, to your.
Well, there's the thing if if you're doing it rightly through the right view, incorrect contemplation, withering away of your, of your sort of intoxication with with life and things that will be freeing.
25:12
The experience of that will not be, oh, I'm, I'm depressed now because there's nothing worth of my satisfaction.
He will be.
No, I'm free now because there is nothing worth of me finding safety in it and thus binding myself to it and constricting my mind.
But if you're honest, you realize, OK, even if nothing's happening now, could I suffer?
25:35
And what if I don't have the ability or time to explain to myself why and how and all these things happen?
Would I suffer?
Would I remain suffering?
What if I refrain from engaging in retroactive explanations of how my suffering came to be and which is why I'm free now?
25:53
What if I just, as an experiment, stop doing that part and just let the suffering sit here when in the rises?
Would I, would I, would I be touched by it?
Will my mind be moved by it or be completely, completely above it without any affinity?
26:13
But there is no amount of this explanation that you can kind of install in someone if they lack that honesty on that personal level of knowing what's happening to them.
And yeah, simple, again, simple question.
You can, as I said, you can quote the commentaries and you can say this and everything is Calapas are constantly moving and all this, but that's not how you see things.
26:35
Like is your consciousness constantly moving?
Is your life constantly flickering on and off, on and off on?
Like that makes no sense.
And if you never heard that external view that you're now kind of trying to, to, to fit the suitors with and so on, it would have never crossed your mind to describe your experience like that because that's not what your experience is.
26:56
Putting aside the whole thing that if you think you can measure motions of durations of your consciousness and moments and flickering, like what commentaries in the whole kind of contemporary in Burmese with Parsons think, they would require you to be basically be an observer outside of this experience as a whole to measure that change.
27:16
But you can't do that.
You can't even imagine the outside of the five aggregates, as the Buddha said so many times, you're fully enclosed, so there is no outside point of view for you in regard to yourself nor others.
It's the aggregate to form, feeling, perception, intention and consciousness fully encapsulated.
27:36
So these notions of measuring, I remember I was read that this was the storage of consciousness.
The collective is like, how can you even know that when all you have is your own consciousness of phenomena, but you come across these ideas, these phenomena, and then you ascribe this external value or this precedes me.
27:54
This is the greater consciousness over there or, or the view I think also was in one of the the early commentaries where where the moment to moment consciousness, which again is just an external idea.
These moments last like 0.0 something that's milliseconds.
28:13
And it's like, how can you measure that?
How can you measure your own conscious?
How can you measure someone else's flickering moments of consciousness?
That's insane.
That's fantasy.
But even you say you could see these moment to moment.
28:30
You cannot see them in that external sense.
You are them.
Your observation of it, your experience as a whole, your intention to look at these moments remains there, enduring for all this time.
Your intention to manage your suffering and refuse to allow Duca to endure remains there, enduring as a basis for all of your other little views that flicker left and right as you read this or you read that.
28:57
So that's what I mean.
The honesty has to bring you back to that recognition of liability to suffer and where your intentions are.
And your intentions are not constantly changing.
If they were, you will not be able to intend anything, let alone act towards anything.
There the the glue, the binding factor that unifies your particular actions.
29:17
That sure, they are changing.
They are fast because they have a greater context that remains unchanged, which is why you're still doing this, which is why I'm still sitting here talking, answering questions and so on.
South, what is the way that one sees things, experience things?
29:40
But, you know, just, well, that's going into beliefs and just, you know, from the start, you just, yeah, you were just here.
Well, yeah, stuff I don't.
Yeah, I mean, like you, you're going to have some input.
29:57
So if you just if you dismiss any information in regard to how you're experiencing things, then you're just going to mystify it.
I'm just here and the nounness and the easiness and the what what if Ness.
So either way, you are not neutral when it comes to experience.
30:14
So the question is finding the right information.
And that's the point here.
All of this is the information that shows you the contradiction of the other information, the management, the high doesn't add up, how you cannot possibly see yourself in the external sense from which you can measure your own consciousness, duration and all of that.
30:32
Because of that, you abandoned that information and then you find it.
But you need information.
One of the factors for the right view is the utterance of another rightly understood.
But yes, you have people's all this information is just causing confusion is just too much.
30:49
So they dismiss all information.
They don't want to read the suitors.
Yes, sure, part of it resulted in good because they dismissed all the wrong information, all the commentaries, all the way pastors, all the modern stuff that's being taught.
But then they also dismissed the right information.
31:05
So what they're left with then is the the complete mystification of whatever's here because you don't have the means to understand it by yourself.
If you did well, you will be some assembled.
But you have.
So you have to develop.
You have to develop some view, you have to develop the right views.
31:24
You, yeah, you have to develop, right?
You already have views, you know, view without any views or standpoints.
But you need to develop the right view, the right standpoint that then correctly without perversion represents your experience.
But your experience is, is always going to be known through views.
31:44
So that's why then you realize with that honest transparency that if I truly want to be free from suffering, then I need to find the teaching that does not provide another explanation for what's happening to me and another belief and another kind of, oh, this is how it is and that's it.
32:00
Adopt this and you're fine because everything fits.
No, I need to find instructions.
They will make me basically not be able to experience suffering in the 1st place.
And then if you take that view already see that's already like a right view for a protugeon because you already knows where to look.
32:18
So then that person would then he would not be too far fetched to then see how virtue, taming of the senses, solitude, how is that fortifying your mind?
It is also, it's not about just another explanation, just another belief.
32:35
It's about training and undoing this being here, that when touched by feeling, it suffers, it resists, it wants more and all of that.
So it's it's it's dismantling those reactions, those those habits, those basically assumptions in regard to that.
32:53
And you know, yeah.
How would you start?
Well, by taming, by by constricting the wrong behaviour, by taming, by moderating eating, by speech, by all of that.
And then the mind becomes immovable.
And then you get to see these things.
And then it was, oh, yeah.
33:09
When you understood then that whatever touches you, whatever it's manifested, that's why it's impermanent, because it came on its own, not because you saw it ending or because this.
So you explained it.
And then I don't need to do anything for as long as I'm alive.
Anything that I experience, I will be reminded of my freedom from it through that experience.
33:30
So this is a suited from the and this is where King Maha Sudasana is passing away and he's the Queen visiting on his deathbed and she says, sire you have 84,000 cities with royal capital of Kusavati foremost aroused desire for these taken interest in life all these wonderful things that you have and he's got all those.
33:57
Possessions.
All these possessions got everything and he rules with kindness.
And she likewise urged the king to live on by taking an interest in all his possessions as described.
Army horses and wires and jewels of everything.
34:13
Yeah, well.
Yeah, and when the queen had spoken, the king said to her, for a long time, my queen, you have spoke to me with loving, desirable, pleasant and agreeable words, and yet in my final hour, your words are undesirable, unpleasant and disagreeable.
34:30
Then she said to him then how exactly your majesty am I to speak to you?
And he says like this my queen, sire, we must be parted and separated from all we hold dear and beloved.
Don't pass away with concerns.
Such concern is suffering and it is criticized.
34:48
Say you have 84,000 cities with the royal capital of Kusavati.
For most give up desire for these, take no interest in life.
Yeah, and so on for the King's.
Possession before the life ends, which you still holding on to them.
He's a that's there's a suffering there.
35:04
So when the king had spoken Queen, the queen cried.
Started to cry, bursting.
Tears.
Wiping away the tears, the Queen said to the king.
She said what he told her to say.
And so on.
Yeah.
And at the at the end of that that suitor, the Buddha goes on to say that thing was first.
35:25
All determinations, all conditions are impermanent.
All determinations are impermanent.
Their nature is to arise, and cease having arisen they will.
Have to cease.
They will have to come to.
Their stealing is true.
35:41
This.
They're stealing.
Not their cessation.
They're stealing.
Yeah.
Stealing of them while they're there, that's the point.
So before things have ceased for that king, IE before he died, before things were ripped away, he's advising himself through the Queen to abandon desire towards those determinations, towards those possessions, to steal them, to let them be, so to speak, to remove his emotional involvement on the ship, satisfaction, safety and everything else.
36:18
Because if that's not done.
There is no.
So then the point is like, OK, so do you practicing stealing of your ownership or do you just sort of trying to to kind of inject the view that nothing is permanent because it would it would disappear.
That's not stealing.
36:34
That's just another cessation.
So you want to steal things before they cease stealing of Sankaras is the peace, is the bliss is Nibana, not cessation of them because that's still samsara.
36:52
They cease here, they arrive somewhere else.
So again, even that whole sutta rests the whole notion of a Nietzsche, the whole notion of impermanence on the level of possessions, on the level of things that you desire.
37:10
They provide satisfaction, they provide zeal, inspiration, will to live.
So you're stealing that desire.
You're not denying the reality and the existence of those things through your secondary, hindsight contrived explanations.