0:15
Bunte, my mind exhibits such a persistent inclination towards seeking structure and order.
I delight in having A to do list and specific goals as a constant source of motivation and security.
0:31
When I don't have such things and instead of instead have chaos, I cannot even keep the precepts.
I think that this is somehow a problem because I should be able to stay steady without structure and despite the chaos.
Please help.
0:49
Well, yes, eventually, but you, you can, you can stay steady despite the chaos, but until then, structure can help you.
Now obviously it's what you take that structure to be.
Is it just like mindless adhering to the observed norm and requirements of your behavior?
1:09
Or is it the the structure of structure in your day so that you can watch your intentions correctly, not resort to coping mechanisms, meditation techniques, but instead actually start the sutures, study the sutures in a, in a, in a, in a, in a systematic manner so that you can then apply that with some, with some discipline around your day-to-day activities so that that structure is fine.
1:32
There's no problem there.
But of course, you know, and you would be recognizing that if you start, if you start applying it rightly, you would, you would then start, you would also then begin to see that you shouldn't be depending on the structures.
1:48
But that doesn't mean that you, you can't benefit from them initially.
So it's not like, oh, I have not developed my mind yet, but I recognize that I shouldn't depend on structures.
So I'll just expose myself to absolute chaotic environment because I shouldn't be moved.
2:05
Well, you shouldn't be moved if you would have completed development of the mind for which certain structure is required.
Gradual training is a form of structure, but you don't do first, but you don't do second what you do 3rd and so on.
Like it takes.
2:20
It takes gradual development, which which is already a form of structuring your practice.
Now, if by structure you mean you need a daily routine that's programmed hour by hour and somebody telling you what to do, well then yeah, you have to abandon that because that is a way to, well, basically does not translate to the real world.
2:46
When sickness and ageing and death and loss of the loved one set set in your, your kind of micromanaged environment in which you were able to practice your mindfulness and so on, where everything was controlled minute by minute, that does not translate.
Basically, you would be struggling to remain unmoved because that environment requires quite a wide basis of maintenance where nothing, where nothing should go wrong in many different areas so that you can afford.
3:11
It's a basic, a privileged, privileged environment which you won't have.
And if if you only know how to practice in that type of protected environment, you, you don't know how to practice.
So that's what I mean.
Like they did their layers to the structure.
3:30
Is it a structure somebody policing my every move and telling me to stop or do it?
Or is it a structure of a gradual training?
Both can be called structures, but they're obviously in very different.
Levels like one one set of structure is very controlling too controlling.
3:45
Well, it's not.
That's really not the main issue.
The main issue is that the the, the former set that this, the set of structure where everything is like micromanaged and and ordered minute by minute is a structure that's rooted in avoidance of responsibility.
4:02
You don't want to think for yourself.
You don't want to endure the doubt for yourself.
You don't want to wonder what should I do next?
Just give it to me written, set in stone on paper, the weight of the authority and I'll just adhere to because it's easier.
And that structure is a structure of the wrong view.
4:19
But if your structure is structure around your daily activities to support your taking up responsibility and sense restraint and withdrawal from the unwholesome states, that's a fine.
That's a fine structure, but you got to be doing it doing it yourself.
Not relying on the on the world to force it upon you.
4:37
Not not relying on the world to force upon you or to or to do it for you, taking up the the the the burden of the action because.
I suppose a person will want to like find a teacher, which is a good thing, who will tell me what to do and I will submit.
So you want to find a teacher so you can learn from, so that you can apply those things yourself for yourself.
4:57
But yes, for many people, finding a teacher equals finding an external authority to which I'll commit so I don't have to think for myself.
And it's, that's what I mean, it's the core of that type of structure is avoiding responsibility.
And that is a, that is a prerequisite for successful practice of them to have to take responsibility.
5:16
So doesn't matter how much effort you invest subsequently upon that structure, in terms of practice, you actually killed it at its roots because there is no responsibility that fundamental level.
So you have to revert all the way back, bend on it and then restart.