0:01
Ponte As a spiritual practitioner, despite dedicating years to cultivating goodwill towards others, I still find occasional moments of ill will surfacing.
While I maintain faith in my chosen technique, I'm starting starting to feel fatigued by its repetitive nature.
0:25
Maybe, well, maybe happy just imagining goodwill and spreading it to others.
So I'm curious if there's an alternative approach to sending goodwill to others that could rejuvenate my practice and infuse it with new energy.
0:45
No, there is no alternative way of sending anything to others.
So the only way to not take out a real will is to it's not true, true, true, fabricating love towards others and pasting it over the basis of ill will, the basis of irritation, the basis of greed, aversion and distraction.
1:09
It's only the only way to truly have friendliness towards others in an unshakable manner is if you have uprooted the basis for non friendliness, for greed, for aversion, for distraction.
So the you're closer to practicing matter rightly.
1:27
I must have said this before.
If you're learning, if you're if you're basically becoming able, if you're developing a skill of not acting out of your emotions by body, by speech and mentally as well, then by by hundreds of years of spent of of spreading goodwill, thoughts and love towards others.
1:47
That's just like applying a Band-Aid to to an infected wound without having the slightest notion of how to actually treat the infection.
Just hoping that the Band-Aid will will extinguish the inflammation, but it won't.
It will make it worse because it's brewing underneath.
2:04
Because the circumstances, you know, it can seem like it's working, like having thoughts and wishing people well.
Your circumstances are you're probably living in an environment, you're not starting arguments.
Things are quite calm, so you're not getting angry.
2:20
You don't.
Not in circumstances which are inviting of arguments.
Basically, Well, yeah, yeah.
Are you not, Are you not getting angry because the mind is immovable by the thoughts of irritation or are you not getting angry because there's currently nothing annoying you, but if there was something, you would not be able to not get angry.
2:42
So like, it's not, it's not like you, you can't have good thoughts and think loving kindness of people.
If you want to make a practice out of that, just don't confuse it for the practice of meta.
Don't confuse it for the practice of uprooting the ill will, because it isn't.
2:59
If you just want to spend your day thinking nicely about people, that's fine.
There's a problem with it.
The problem is when you think that those those practices, those fabricated thoughts would somehow magically uproot the the, the liability to ill will and irritations and resistance that it's not about, it does not exist on the level of other people.
3:21
The root of your will is the root of resistance towards your own physical presence and the feeling that's felt there.
So that Patiga did the suitors talk about the resistance towards your own feeling.
If it's unpleasant, that's the root of your will.
3:38
Everything else is second to it.
So the whole practice of friendliness is as as basically as like the the suit is described very often.
It's like having purified your behavior way beforehand, established in virtue, established in right view, established in not acting out.
3:58
Then you review the beginning, the core here.
Is there any resistance here?
No, OK, I will cultivate that framework.
Non resistance towards anything that arises here on the level of feeling within this experience, then I shall direct that in every, direct that in every direction.
4:18
In other words, I shall then look in every possible direction from here to see is there any resistance towards anything else?
Could there be any resistance towards anything else?
So you just basically expand the same framework that's already here, unchanged non resistance.
4:42
If you if you not resisting that unpleasant feeling you.
Can't be angry with others.
Impossible.
Anger towards towards a person, towards something external requires you to have already jumped on account of that resistance towards what's being felt here.
5:00
You're already averse towards the feeling that you're feeling.
And then so how do you tame the resistance?
Well, how do you tame any craving in regard to any feeling?
And you have the three types of feeling.
OK, so you want to tame your real will.
5:20
You need to tame your your, your desires first because that's another way of jumping on account of what's being felt.
Just in this sense, jumping towards jumping with craving, jumping with delight, with desire to have more of it.
But then when something unpleasant touches you, you jump with the desire to get rid of it.
5:38
I mean the whole, the whole practice of Mehta, it's like one of the, it's the Brahma viharas, it's the dwelling of the Brahmas and the holy life, the celibate life is called brahmacharya.
So you want to dwell like a Brahma.
5:55
You can't just be having these.
Well, you can think that, but if you want to dwell like a Brahma means your whole life starts to needs to begin to match that.
And you begin that by practice of celibacy.
For example, even if you have no instruction about meta and and and and positive thoughts towards others, by refraining from giving into the physical desires, by refraining from from basically desire of sensuality, you are fading around close to a Brahma like a Brahma.
6:29
So you want to dwell like a Brahma even more so then on account of that purify livelihood, not acting out of lust, not acting out of aversion, taming your mind, taming your senses through a sense of strength and during things rightly and so on.
Then you can look closer into like what's being felt here and now are the traces of resistance towards that.
6:54
So by removing the the the resistance towards an unpleasant feeling here, there will be no external counterpart of real will towards the person out there.
So then you just protect their framework protected in regard to any direction anywhere in the world upside down from wherever it might come.
7:12
The framework here of non resistance remains the same.
You're not sending the framework to the east, north and West.
No, you protected here from all these directions.
So it's just a way of describing in the suit is that nowhere up, down, below, from any direction, nothing can come that can perturb the framework because the mind has been tamed to establishment in virtue beforehand.
7:37
So having abandoned unskillful behavior, this is to say he then dwells with the mind, protected with with friendliness, with the framework of friendliness, with the framework of compassion, and ultimately with the framework of equanimity.
The highest Brahma Vihara is basically the the, the economic immovable, indifferent completely nothing felt, no movement there whatsoever.
8:02
Doesn't matter what comes from what direction.
That's what Brahmavi Harris culminate with.
That's the highest one.
Exactly.
So you could already see how your practice of sending positive thoughts is incompatible with the culmination of the that practice of of of meta.
8:22
If meta were to be sending of the positive thoughts, then surely practice of indifference will be sending off indifferent thoughts, spreading indifference towards everyone.
How does that work?
Because if if you're actively engaging with it, you're not indifferent anymore.
But if it's about protecting of the framework, then the practice remains the same.
8:43
Whether it's the first one was higher or the 4th, the principle remains the same.
So that's what that's what I mean.
Like instead of thinking, oh, I practice probably harder by having wishful thinking and positive thoughts of other people think that you practice probably harder by being celibate brahmacharya.
9:04
And by being celibate, you are taming your mind, which means it's it's even without actively sort of trying to make it immovable, it's becoming more removable in regard to feelings.
They will want to move it otherwise and then sure, if you're already established in all of that skilled in that behavior, then you could now look even closer in as I said, that the traces would it move in regard to this or that?
9:31
Are the traces available?
Are the traces of aversion towards anything that could be felt towards a change in the pleasant feeling?
Is there an aversion?
Is there delight in the in it when when the unpleasant feeling changes and and detach yourself from it and protect that protect that state of mind.