0:00
I'm Gutura Nikaya, 5175.
This is called the outcast.
Endowed with these five qualities, a lay follower or Pasika is an outcast of a lay follower, a stain of a lay follower.
Number one.
0:15
He does not have faith in the Buddha and the Sangha.
He's unvirtuous.
He's superstitious and believes in auspicious signs and not in action.
He seeks, that's a big one.
That's the one that I want to speak about.
0:32
He seeks outside the Sangha for a person worthy of offerings.
And he first does, does notorious deeds there.
So possessing these five qualities, a lay follower is a stain of a lay follower.
So in particularly #3 he is suspicious, superstitious, and he believes in auspicious science, not in action.
0:54
Come.
And that's kind of most people, really my.
Degree to different.
Degrees.
Yes, because how many Buddhists believe in chanting?
Even even if it's not these kind of rituals and ritual practices, even if it's your own virtue, if you don't understand the root of your action or restraint in regard to your virtue, you are implying you're believing implicitly did abstaining from certain behavior and cultivating certain other behavior will magically purify your mind, will result in the purification of your mind.
1:40
You don't see how you don't understand, and you certainly have no direct input.
And that's already superstitious view that's already still about the Paramus, even if there are no external, as I said, crude ritual, ritualistic behaviors and, and, and and worships and and and beliefs and and so on.
2:00
Just not understanding the roots of your actions, your own, your own precepts, your own virtue will not be, will be a fetter, will be Silvat Paramas.
Now, obviously you abandoned Silvat Paramas, and not by abandoning virtue, but by abandoning your view in regard to it.
2:17
View being I expect this set of norms and behaviors to purify the mind for me.
So understanding action is what most people don't basically, that's pretty much and even even all the like the, the religious teachers back in the day, they didn't, they overlooked it and they sought enlightenment here and there and in these practices and in extreme commitment to, to the, to the practice and endurance and everything else.
2:49
And they missed what was right in front of the noses.
The root of karma.
It's right here, right now.
It's your own intentions.
Discerning that as the basis for practice, and then aligning your behaviour by body, speech and mind with that discernment, that's the way out.
3:16
By doing acts which result in craving.
Well, there are from craving that result in suffering.
By abstaining from those acts so that you can understand the root of action, because certain acts inevitably carry greed, diversion, delusion and and, and, and, and cause greed, diversion, delusion to increase.
3:42
So once the Buddha recognize that he abstained from those acts by body, speech, and mentally, he was not entertaining them, he was not indulging them.
And then when the mind dried up from that, he understood my behavior is as pure as it can be now, but it's still bound with action, it's still bound with intention, it's still bound with him doing that.
4:07
So then he started looking further within the same practice, obviously not elsewhere.
And what did he discover?
Well, he discovered that the root of the wholesome actions is fundamentally subjected to a Nietzsche and Dukka because of its impermanence, because of its unknown ability.
4:33
So the mind now having been dried up from greed, diversion, delusion, left with wholesome intentions, wholesome actions understood that those cannot be owned even if you want to.
So Sabe sankara Nietzsche, sabe sankara Dukka for that very reason.
4:51
And that then results in the experience of sabe dama anata, understanding that these acts, even the previous acts that you have abandoned because they were clouding your, your perspective, narrowing perspective even more.
They do all share the same nature, good and bad, fundamentally unknownable, subject to distraction, destruction, impermanent cannot be yours.
5:17
And there was the way out.
So it's like the most direct way.
There is no, there is no there is no a middleman, so to speak, between your practice, if done rightly and insight and results of it.
5:37
That even if say so to Pana, we still not in our house has work to do.
When he attend to things rightly with Yoni Suman Sicara and his right view, he sees Nibana, he sees exactly what Nibana is.
He knows exactly how to get there, but of course now he has to keep walking there and protecting that and and cultivating that behaviour sufficiently until it's fully developed.
6:00
But he has no doubt as to where the problem is and where the solution is.
So that's why he's beyond sylabat Paramus.
He's freed.
He cannot be superstitious even if he wants to, because that already requires an external agent of chance, circumstance, magic, whatever.
6:20
And that's not where the problem was, which is not where the solution can come from either.
So you, you are responsible for your suffering.
It's not something else that's that's making you suffer.
6:40
That's that's now that you have to appeal to to grant you freedom.
From it, yeah, well, you could, you could look at it like that.
You could look at it even in like say, even if even in a, in a subtler manner, say, say you recognize that your mind is not in your control, that your mind is a wild animal that's every now and then subjecting you to suffering through it's own like thoughts and and refusal to listen to you and so on.
7:11
So how do you go about it?
Do you roll up your sleeve, take the whip, leash that animal and you start the training?
Or do you go and bow to the shrine and chant and do all these practices hoping that that will come to mind, which then in return won't bother?
7:29
You it.
Boils down to that.
We're gonna retreat protected environment, enter a peaceful state, and then hope it will last.
7:47
Hopefully this mind will not turn against me when I get out of the retreat and when life starts hitting me again.
But either way, there is no direct communication between you and your mind, and there's certainly no understanding as to direct understanding as to what comes this mind and what agitates it.
8:04
There is only the approximations, hope and wishful thinking.
So you say you're not going to be able to see sabe dama anata?
8:21
All things are not my own myself if you don't cultivate the wholesome.
If you're not withdrawn thoroughly from the unwholesome, withdrawn from the Yeah, unwholesome intentions and actions by body, speech in mind.
Because there is that that that suits and some people get confused about it.
8:38
It says I am the owner of my actions.
Yes.
So some people say I am not the owner of the body.
The feelings, the perceptions, the intentions.
If you're in our hunt, you're not.
I am the.
Owner of my Yeah, because you start as a non other hunt.
8:54
So the only way to become an arrow hunt is to first take responsibility and ownership of that which you assume the ownership of.
You can't just be a protugena still very much assuming ownership of things.
And then just learn the information that arrow hunt is not the owner of his actions because he's an arrow hunt and he's freed from his aggregates and so on.
9:15
And then just start applying that information to you.
It's like applying theory to the practice that you haven't developed, but saying that it applies to you because, well, because of wishful thinking, because of an excuse.
It's like saying basically, if you apply yourself and train yourself, you can be a master Carpenter.
9:39
Anybody can be a master Carpenter.
That is the nature of human situation allows mastery of carpentry for anyone.
Thus, I'm a master Carpenter already.
No, you can be.
9:56
That doesn't mean you are.
So first you have to admit that you're not.
Take the ownership of your non mastery of carpentry or in the in the more pertinent sense, take the ownership of your possessions because you do assume them and that is a starting point.
10:14
If you train rightly, you will relinquish it all and abandon it.
And then the statement of freed from everything, free from the action, not you can't own the feelings.
All of that will be true.
Will be applicable to you.
Because it's funny, if you start off with nothing is mine, it's all not mine.
10:34
Even my actions, all just the body acting and choices being made.
It's nothing to do with me.
I'm not responsible for anything.
What is the result of that?
I'm not responsible for The person is just going to do whatever.
Yeah, it's, it's basically that's that that shows the limit, as I said, the limit of logic.
10:54
It's, it's a true statement in an impersonal public logic sense that you are not the owner of erection.
But that is not who you are.
That is not where your starting point is.
You always, your starting point is your experience here and now your point of view, the public view, the public logic, the applicable theory is secondary to your experience as such.
11:16
But people put that first and their own experience second.
That's why you, you need to be sort of gripped with the desire to be free from suffering because there is always personal that can never be public information.
Doesn't matter how much people try to make it, when suffering touches you, that's always felt personally.
11:34
So if you don't know this is where it needs to be dealt with, then all this information of aggregates are not yours and we are already in Ebana and all of that.
You realize, well, that is a true, that is true only in a certain sense, because there is a difference between the same information.
11:51
By the way, say you hear the information that aggregates are not yours, but you have not been taming your behavior by body, speech and mind.
You did not make the effort, you did not develop right endurance and you get the information.
It will only have a certain depth that information.
12:09
It can maybe inspire you, give you an excuse, make you make you feel light, and you don't own anything.
You relinquish everything, but fundamentally you are bound with your ownership, not through informational lack of it.
You're bound through your own, with your ownership, through your actions, actions infused with greed, aversion, delusion.
12:27
That is what binds you to owning things and and being controlled by them.
Now imagine somebody who has stained their behavior by body, speech in mind, has not been giving into the unwholesome intentions of greed, aversion, delusion, has been taming them, has been enduring them rightly.
12:44
He hears the information, the same information, the same same sentence, same logic, same conclusion, same rationale.
It will land a lot deeper.
And the depth of that is something that the first person can never understand unless he develops his behavior by body speech, unless he goes through the training.
13:07
And that's what it's meant when he says that dama is beyond mere reasoning.
See, you could reason that yes, we are not the owners, everything makes sense and look, everything is changing and all of that.
But that's not the dama, although it sounds like the dama, although it's from the suitors, it's not the dama 'cause it likes that depth.
13:25
Dama begins only after certain depth and no amount of your logic and reasoning can show you that depth before you commit to the practice of purification of your body's speech in mind and arrive at that depth yourself.
And that's the difference in the nutshell.
13:49
So when said that dama is beyond reason does not mean that dama is a mystical thing that sort of cannot be thought of and stuff like that.
No, it means reason.
It's not enough because the wouldn't ever dismiss the reason.
Quite the opposite.
He goes and he says a wise man wishing for his own welfare.
14:08
He goes and listens to this teacher or that teacher.
He'll pandas, he reasons.
He tries to intellectually grasp what is being said and whether it has potential to lead to freedom from suffering or not, whether it's blameworthy, whether it encourages actions that are blameworthy or not, and all of that.
14:27
Not all.
He bends the reason and he focuses on the moment.
And he has astral projection experience or something.
No, he reasons.
But once he has reasoned, he also starts doing the other work.
And the reason that he, the reasoning that he had in the beginning will then grow through his practice of purifying his actions by body, by speech, by mind.
14:50
And then eventually, when he arrives at the deeper understanding of the nature of things sees for himself, he will see, Oh yeah, reason was part of it.
If I did not intellectually grasp what needs to be done, I would not have done it.
And no amount of revolving around logic would magically take you to that depth, because that depth is only attainable through your own development of purification of body, speech, and mind.
15:15
You'll be able to see it yourself, not just hear about it.
The reason will then basically, as I said, acquire another dimension, let's put it that way.
So now the reasoning is 2 dimensional, but you're not aware of it because you are within those two dimensions.
15:34
But with the depth that's developed through cultivation of virtue, gradual training, there is 1/3 dimension being developed in regard to the same information, same reason.
So you don't acquire new reasoning, you just realize a new perspective in regard to it which could not have come on account of mere reasoning and permutations of your reason.
15:57
And that something is a Buddhist scholar can never understand because he has mastered the two two-dimensional reasoning of Buddhist information and everything adds up and every reference adds to everything, and everything is known.
But he's mistaken that for understanding.
16:14
Understanding that can only be developed, as I said, understanding the third dimension that can only be developed on account of also your behavior going in a certain direction and taking that reason with it.
And then in hindsight, you could see the difference between your reasoning 2 dimensional and three-dimensional.
16:33
But for somebody who is so gripped and confident and dependent on two-dimensional reasoning, I logic, any information like this, we're just going to be will be just assimilated into the two-dimensional reasoning and no actions will follow in the right direction.
16:54
Actions of sensory strain, right endurance and so on because of the confidence of the two-dimensional reasoning.
And that's no dhamma will take place.
And that's why exactly you have many people today pH DS in Buddhism knowing everything suit does inside out, Poly fluent, can speak and not even sold upon us by their own admission.