0:01
Do you have any direct method to overcome this sense of ownership?
Contemplate through your ownership that which you own.
0:17
So take up that which you you regard as yours and then see how or rather where it is rooted at, whether in your sense of control or whether it's something else that it isn't yours.
So for example, the body, take up the body, my body.
0:38
Is that sense of my body?
Is that the center of it?
Or would this body be depending upon all these individual organs within that sense of ownership of this body that that are required to be operating that I cannot control?
If those organs were to fail, would I be able to entertain the notion of this body's mind if this body dies right, right in front of me?
1:04
So you realize you couldn't.
So you're you're perverting your order by regarding, by giving the priority of that sense of self of my master of this body.
And then when you think about the individual organs, you don't think about them within that sense of master.
1:21
You think about left, right before or after.
That's why you don't uproot it.
So the closest method would be to contemplate within this ownership.
So you can't leave the ownership out and contemplate things, right?
Because the whole point of contemplation is to experience the non ownership.
1:40
And you experience the non ownership when you see that this body, no matter how much it's in your control, its heart is rooted in that which you cannot even conceive controlling such as heart breeding, lungs pumping blood, operating organs, functioning brain.
1:57
You can't even conceive how it would be to control those things that have say in their operating.
Yet they are the fundamental basis for the notion of your body as a whole that you do own mistakenly.
Because we think we come.
2:13
We myself comes first.
Yes, I come first.
Thus this is for me, this is mine.
It's other way around.
It's because I take all this to be mine.
I develop a sense of I am.
But that sense of I am can be undone.
2:29
Not by denying it, by saying oh, there's no self.
There's not really me.
Look, everything is changing.
This is no, no, you need to take up that sense of I am and then see that it's founded upon things that cannot be yours.
Then automatically your experience is the experience of, not I am.
2:45
Reversing the mistake.
Yeah, draining, basically draining them.
The the kind of the structure stays the same, but what has drained away is that appropriation from it.
That's how the Buddha would say for an Arjun, it's like a palm stump cut at its root.
3:01
So the stump, the branches that grown, they stayed, but now they're then done.
They're petrified.
They're still there as the way person's experience might have proliferated throughout the ignorant life.
But once you approve that ignorance, once you remove that appropriation, it stops proliferating and then just stays like a palm stump until even that breaks apart in part in ibound.
3:22
So if you lose it or get rid of that sense of ownership, your personality doesn't.
How does your personality?
Well, anything in your personality that was depending upon the ownership that will disappear.
3:39
But there are other things that were not depending upon ownership.
They were depending upon like hollow habits, habits.
They were not rooted in greed, aversion, delusion.
That stays.
That's why, as I said many times and in the sutras you read often, people cannot tell an Arahan externally, and even another Arahan cannot come and see the, I don't know, some special order around him, how he's another.
3:59
No, he can tell an Arahan when they start discussing each other's understanding of Dhamma and they can say, Oh yeah, he understood this.
Probably to the extent of course, then the Buddha or somebody with with very, very developed mind could see little traits, little things, and based on which he could tell the other person's mind.
4:17
But on an average you can't even like Sarah Puta couldn't tell in some cases that the person was another hand.
Then he would go to the Buddha and said, where was his rebirth?
And he says, what do you mean?
Didn't he say he was another hand?
Yeah, he did.
But he was associating with some, not some reputable families and so on.
He said, well, that's that's not my person.
4:33
Who's blame world?
Person who's blame world?
Because they leave this body, they take another body, as in they keep remain bound with some sada.
But I can tell you he wasn't he wasn't blame world.
He was another hand even before he died, but somebody couldn't see it.
So the OR the other that that that famous one was like really harsh in his speech and the people were often offended.
4:56
And then the Buddha said, oh, it's his old habits.
They, they were not rooted in ill will or greed or anything like that.
But obviously he would come across as very angry, furious.
Of course, that doesn't mean like, oh, OK, so I don't have to.
You will know that.
You will know which habits can stay once you're in Arhan or on the way of becoming one.
5:15
You can't decide that beforehand.
Oh, these are my neutral habits.
So you have to take them all with caution.
If you're in a state of protujuna, you can't trust any of your habits, so you have to keep investigating any of it.
If it's rooted on greed, aversion, delusion, and truly, truly, when you dismantle everything that shouldn't be there, whatever's left, then you know that can be left.
5:36
So it's very different from saying that self.
Oh yeah, yeah, there is no self.
Yeah, the Buddha never said that, but he asked does the self exist?
He wouldn't say it does itself does not exist.
He wouldn't answer it.
No, it's a it's a shortcut.
5:52
It's a quick fix in terms of satisfying explanation, but it's not a contemplation.
When you say there's no self, look, all these rocks, they're constantly changing electrons and atoms.
That's nothing is real.
That's there is no self.
This is just a hollow convention, conventional speech and so on.
6:08
No, that's that's not what Buddha said.
Because you can.
Because.
Conventions are real as such, yeah, you might not call itself, but The thing is that phenomena that you refer to yourself, it's there.
If you weren't there, you wouldn't be able to refer to it whatsoever.
So dismissing the reality does not remove your ownership of that reality.
6:30
Which means, ah, so I should be concerned with me appropriating reality, not being concerned about dismantling conventions and proving the did nothing exists.
That's like instead of treating the illness in regard to the body, you just go and chop up the body and say, see, the body can be chopped up.
6:49
Thus it's not real.
No, it is real as a as a collection of parts that can be chopped up.
That's a reality and there was never a problem.
So there is that self, there is that sense of self.
It's not that there is no self, but what you should do is remove the ownership of that sense of self and then it becomes anata, as in not myself.
7:21
Because it practice of denial and.
Actually I don't want to say not myself because people might assume are someone else's self.
No, anata is self that you don't own and they cannot be called self, so it's not self.
So that which was taken itself still there, but now it's not taken as not self.
7:43
But people are concerned with denying that which is taken itself, which is an aspect of their experience one way or the other.
But as the Buddha said, the five aggregates are not the assumption, are not the holding the view of the self, but there is no view of the self apart from the five aggregates to its desire.
8:02
And last, in regard to the five aggregates that the view of self is there.
But you coming and saying there's no self.
The pirates are impermanent.
There is no self.
You're just dismissing it the problem and without actually understanding it.
Because if you were to, if you were to truly understand it, well, the only way to truly understand it is to free yourself from that self, to see it as not self.
8:21
So an explanation that you think you understood, Unless it's freeing you from that sense of self, don't think you understood it.
Because people can put a lot of time and effort in denial.
Practice denial.
Just deny.
Deny for years and years.
Many of the meditation methods and techniques are all based on that view.
8:39
Just denial and seeing the moment to moment movement.
They will kind of show you that somehow things are not really real, cannot be yours.
But that that whole practice goes completely against being self transparent, honest, authentic.
Saying this, I do experience this self.
8:57
I do experience this.
Thing there is mother, there is father, there is given.
There is there is no gender.
Yeah, well, OK, people can deny anything whatever they please as the attitude.
Yeah, it can be aimed literally at anything.
That's why the world said the right, the worldly right view is the view that acknowledges the validity of of of random phenomena, of phenomena in your experience.
9:17
No, there is this, there is, there is given, there is a, there is mother, there is father, there is deliberation, there is a part allowing like you don't need to see them of when of course you don't see them at that level.
But you need to know that there is a possibility of them being being real, as in there is a possibility of being free.
9:36
But if you keep denying everything, you will never accept that possibility as a present phenomenon.
And that's the key, accepting possibilities as a present negative phenomenon in your experience.
Yeah, it's real.
The possibility is real.
I don't know how to what extent but I could find out if I apply myself.
9:56
So you, you don't want to deny anything really.
You want to restrain yourself from what you were told it's unwholesome, Agree the verse delusion that you can see that it's unwholesome and then within that you don't need to deny further.
There will be like overshooting the mark.
You want to understand what's in front of you.
10:13
That's what I would have said.
The whole universe is contained within this less than 6 foot long body and so on.
He said his body is not real, thus none of the universe is real.
There's no, there's no trouble, there is no mother, there's no father, there's no life.
Because there were those views at the time that he quite heavily criticized.
10:31
Ah, nobody gets killed.
There's nothing.
It's just elements just and actually modern interpretation of Buddhist anata, it's actually one of those wrong views back in the day that the Buddha criticized when they say everything is comprised of constantly changing electrons.
And so nothing is real or nothing, nothing can be mined.
There is no self and people believe that whereby they said, oh, nobody gets killed.
10:50
Even if you go and cut everybody on the left side of Ganges with a sharp sword, nobody gets killed.
All that happens is the the the like the sword runs through the elements, runs through the electrons and atoms.
You can just call it whatever you want.
The view is the same and will say it's completely wrong view because you're blaming the five aggregates for your assumption, for your sense of self, failing to see that its desire and lasting regard to the five aggregate, that the sense of self is there, but it's not the five aggregates.
11:18
So you killing the five aggregates does not free you from the sense of self, Hence person who is not freed from the sense of self.
When the five aggregates disintegrate, as in when they die, they're still there, they get reborn.
Yeah, it reminds me of when someone's got a problem and it's not, you know, complaining about trying to talk it out and then I don't know the answer.
11:40
But anyway, anyway, everything's impermanent.
So yeah, anyway, it's, it's OK.
So it's like this.
Oh well, I've got this problem, but I'll just deny it now.
No, unfortunately it's, it's it's it's it's prevalent as a view, but it's it's just rooted in in lazy self reflection, like in in self reflection.
12:01
That doesn't go far enough.
So then you just put a cap on it by by by saying, ah, well, it's all impermanent anyway, so I won't bother with it.
I'll just, you know, watch my breakfast, be peaceful and live a simple life.
12:17
You can live life as as simply as you want, as a vegetable and still remain equally ignorant.
And that's the problem.
It's not how complex your life is.
Of course you want to simplify it because it can be too much in like to start with to practice, but that's secondary.
12:37
It's just creating the suitable condition for you to understand what's right in front of you.
But thinking that the goal of your life is to simplify or to just do this, just do that without making the effort to understand it and go through that unpleasantness of unraveling the the, the deep existential feelings of fear and anxiety.
12:56
Yeah, there's no practice without that.