0:00
I have one suitor here and a few questions.
Is paying attention to pleasant breathing sensations a valid practice for developing of the right view?
No, absolutely not.
0:22
And it seems that that kind of practice to pay attention to pleasant breathing sensations seems to be just another sensual act.
I know it's not the same as a sexual act, but it's still a pleasant physical act that one can absorb into and therefore try to escape suffering through pleasure, which is the point of any sensual act.
0:50
It is.
It is any sensations basically is just another word for tactile.
So it means it's it's a tactile sense that comes on the base of your body.
And even if it's not necessarily pleasant, if your practice is just to attend to the sensations of the tactile nature, which is the nature of sensations, there are no sensations that are not tactile.
1:14
People often tend to assume sensations are like Veda and feelings, but they're not.
They're completely tactile, like sensation of of things touching your skin or sensations on the inside of your body that you can have a tactile sense of.
1:31
So observing sensations, it's always going to be on the level of perception.
So sensations can never be feelings because as the suitor say, what is feeling well, feeling is that which feels and what is perception.
Perception is that which perceives.
So perception perceives, feeling, feels, but people kind of through that kind of model Ness of of their own understanding and information, while they're perceiving a mere tactile sensations, they think they're being mindful of Veda or feeling, which is always a completely the opposite direction of where you are, where your attention is.
2:08
So in expecting that the right view would come on a kind of close watching of tactile sensations, you can see how how how mistaken that is on so many levels.
It implies the truth comes from just magical appearance through your senses.
2:25
But beyond your senses in this presents itself through through some some practice of observation.
But that's not understanding.
They're just witnessing a random thing that then you believe to be your enlightenment or or sorta party or whatever else.
2:42
But if you're in the suit, there's just no mention of that whatsoever.
It starts with a gradual training withdrawal from unwholesome, and then discerning skillful, skillful, and unskillful is unskillful.
Recognizing the root of the unwholesome, discerning it fully understanding it, not not feeding it through your ignorant actions and wrong attention.
3:04
And that's how you undo the entire samsara through the diligent work of abstaining from things that should be abstained and cultivating things that should be cultivated.
And you could see how the modern practice of sensation watching, as I often said, it's like, like staring at the, as I often said, it's like, it's like staring at the basically trying to, trying to hunt down the moment where the truth will just magically reveal itself.
3:32
And you could see how how that idea would be popular because it kind of does away with all the tedious part of pain and development that you have to go through, as with anything that new that you're learning and picking up a craft and a skill and understanding.
3:48
So all I need to do is just get closer and closer and closer to my sensation, watching to observing the tactile things on the basis of my body.
And then the truth will just hit me and I'll just going to have a magical experience.
And then from then onwards everything will be fine.
4:05
And it's like, it's completely circumstantial, random.
And as I said it, it, it does not exist in the suitors at all, at least not in the early sutas that we talked about the the later developments of Buddhism.
They might have developed their own scripture to support this.
4:20
Certainly commentaries invented this whole thing starting from Buddha Gossen with Sudimagga and Abidama before that.
But that's not found in the sutas.
The, the path of purification, how they call it was very clear, the gradual training.
And he said, like if anybody, they would have said if anybody and even in the past would have attained liberation or anything approximating liberation, they would have had to do it only through this way of purifying virtue, your actions and full understanding of the, the, the, the, the intentions, which are the root of karma, basically.
4:54
And if somebody claims that they can develop full enlightenment, purification apart from this such thing is not possible.
So you ask yourself, like when you're watching your sensations, what are you implying?
What are you emphasizing?
What do you, what do you expect to happen?
5:14
What do you expect to, to, to, to, to, to occur?
And then see whether it aligns with these ideas that you can broadly find in the suitors without any kind of great effort of of insights and understanding just to being informed with the suitors.
5:32
You get the general sense of what practice kind of boils down to.
And then C, is that what you're expect?
Is that what you're doing?
Is that what you're expecting to happen when you're watching your sensations and committed to like concentrating harder and harder and harder?
I mean, I often quoted that Suta, which is actually two suitors that I kind of joined into one, where the Buddha compared any such meditation to to to sensuality.
5:59
It says pre meditate, miss meditate over meditate, under meditate.
Basically when you're wrongly attending to your objects, if you're expecting your meditation, your samadhi to come out of focusing on an object, it's already a form of meditation with sensuality because you're emphasizing the object of your senses, tactile.
6:24
And then in another sutta, the Mara uses the same wording of pre meditate, miss meditate over meditate.
And then he adds this similist to illustrate that, saying, oh, it's like a Jackal weighting down, hunting down a mouse, waiting for it to appear to pounce on, or an owl of fish and things like that.
6:42
This is my novelty experience.
That this must.
Be mine.
You are expecting a novelty experience to come and then when you, oh, when you get it, then that's a success.
You caught it, you haunted it down.
You got it now.
But as I said, that direction, and I'm not denying the reality of that, by the way, with the mouse, the reality of novelty experiences or you can get loads.
7:03
What I'm saying is the dama practice is completely the opposite direction from that.
So where your attention is, when you are focusing on the tactile sensations, watching moment to moment to moment, expecting Calapas to reveal the truth to you, and so on, the dama, the understanding would be completely at the back of that, where you're not looking.
7:25
So would you, would you say that that mean what you mean there is you need to be able to understand the nature of experience.
You need to be able to understand the nature of your intentions, which begins through purifying your bodily behaviour, verbal behaviour and mental behaviour.
7:45
So you are responsible for your thoughts, which ones you welcome, which ones you cultivate, which ones you allowed to to sort of linger around in which ones you ignore.
But most people don't even see that they might be able to take on the precepts, keep the keep the physical restraint, maybe police their speech a bit better and so on.
8:04
But mentally they're just subjected to what their mind thinks.
And then they just try to, to get rid of it, get rid of these thoughts.
But either way, they don't see that they are actually responsible for them.
So that's the gradual training that then once you behavior and virtue has been established, you get to notice kind of the same pattern.
8:23
If you're looking at things rightly, you still have to notice the same pattern regarding your thoughts, which is the pattern of, oh, so there is a thought arisen.
I haven't created it.
The possibility presented itself to do this or do not do that.
8:40
Which one do I relish?
Which one do I emphasize?
Which one do I lean towards?
Which one do I cultivate?
Which one do I welcome?
So I removed the welcoming.
I said no, I should not welcome that.
But I don't try to get rid of it.
I don't try to deny it.
I don't try to focus away and pretend it's not there.
8:56
I basically take responsibility for the pressure that that thought exerts on me without trying to destroy the thought, because that will be already overstepping into Maura's domain.
So I just go to another question.
9:17
Can I not use such a practice of focusing on pleasant breathing to replace my coarse sensual axe?
If I find joy in simple attention to the breath, I hope that my mind will want that pleasure instead of other dangerous pleasures.
9:34
I hope to find a pleasure which is separate from sensuality so that I can experience the joy of Jana.
So that's that's the.
Yeah, that's the idea.
That's the basic idea.
It is.
See the problem with that idea is that person, whoever has that, they admit that focusing on the central pleasure of the breath is better then core sensuality.
9:56
But what they don't understand is that the danger, of course, sensuality is still present in the danger of your sensual breath.
Because the danger it, the danger of sensual desire is not because they're coarse or subtle, it's because they pertain to the body.
10:15
It's because they're tactile, because they're physical.
The senses are Mara's domain, so fundamentally what you would be doing in such practice is replacing one thing within Mara's domain with the subtler thing within Mara's domain.
In thinking, you're avoiding the danger of the Mara's domain while still remaining very much within the same domain unchanged.
10:38
That's why in that don't go through Kaya can't remember.
Maybe we can quote it.
I don't remember the numbers.
It was basically what the Buddha said that that one could enter and abide, develop the first Jana without having already fully seen the gratification, danger and escape.
10:59
In regard to sensuality in the five hindrances, in general such thing is not possible.
So first you need to see that danger pertaining to anything that you would be attending for pleasure and completely abandoned that attitude.
Then and only then, the pleasure of Jana can arise when you don't look for it, don't need it, don't seek it.
11:20
And that's why that pleasure of Jana that's not being sought in that central manner is the pleasure that's not underlined by the underlying tendencies.
As the suitors would say, it's not in Mara's domain.
11:49
So, so from these questions, you know, it seems like you're suffering.
You want to get rid of well, free from suffering, get rid of suffering you want to get right for you.
So instead of doing all these course on wholesome actions, sexual actions, you, you go into these subtle actions of you know, doesn't hurt anyone in a in a coarse manner.
12:16
It might be the wrong view and so on, but it's still the same.
I want pleasure to get pleasure because I'm suffering and pleasure is the freedom.
It's going to be, it's inevitable that a person will be doing it to some extent.
12:37
In other words, if you are withdrawn from unwholesome things, the course unwholesome things, say you celebrate keeping the precepts and so on, you will be finding, you know, sensual, semi sensual joy in other things on your day-to-day basis, like going for a walk doing this or doing that.
12:54
It's not always said, but it could be sensual in that sense.
But that's not the main issue.
That's the if.
If you, if you continue with the purification of behavior, if you don't revert back to the course unwholesome, clearly unwholesome pleasures, this will kind of level itself out.
13:13
The issue is if you were to think that, for example, the pleasure of a, of a, of a nice walk in the nature, peaceful, beautiful sounds, birds chirping.
If you were to hold the view that that is Yojana is the practice of Dharma is, is getting rid of the sensuality.
13:30
That's really the problem.
So see, if a person is watching their breath, as I said many times to to calm down because they were agitated or whatever else, but without implying with their view, with their emphasis that this is the practice of samadhi and and and Jana and right view, there would be no problem really.
13:50
As this will lead me.
To it exactly is the implication behind that action, which is that, oh, this is the practice that takes me away from sensuality, which it doesn't into into the right view.
They will then magically happen through the novelty pleasure that will arise on account of this refined sensuality.
14:08
And it's like, oh, that's the problem.
It's your view there.
But if you don't have that view and then you watch your breath because you're bored or something, fine.
It's not going to take you too far out.
It's not going to sort of corrupt you.
But you realize most often, more often than not, when people ask these questions, they don't ask the mutually.
14:29
They don't ask them in this sense.
They ask them, is is this a valid practice for enlightenment, for uprooting of sensuality, for becoming anagamie?
And as I said, it's a categorical no.