0:03
So, Bunte, I have some problems in regard to relationships in my daily life.
Now that I have been keeping the precepts, it seems to be affecting those relationships because other people in my life don't keep those precepts and I keep them.
0:27
So now my family and my friends are all not keeping the precepts.
Thus we are live, we're going in opposite directions.
And it seems that, you know, so now they're upset with me for keeping the precepts because I'm doing that which is going opposite to what they are doing.
0:51
Should I be trying to get them on my side or just let them go their own way?
As far as I can see, those relationships are not are no longer valuable.
1:07
Well, yeah, I mean the relationship, the relationships might not be valuable, but you might still be stuck with those people.
So you can't just switch, switch it off, like if it's the same household or something like that.
So you don't have to change their ways.
That's not on you.
1:25
But you do need to draw a line.
So if if your friends or family or people in your environment are trying to pressure you to not keep the precepts means they don't really, well, they're not showing respect to your basic choice.
So you will need to draw a line just so they realize that that, you know, they might not be showing the respect because they don't take you seriously, you know.
1:51
So if you want to be taken seriously, you need to stick to the precepts and stick to the practice and put up with the initial peer pressure and whatever teasing or people being upset, just take that as a result of your precepts.
Either way, you can't, you know, you shouldn't be getting angry or trying to change the ways or get them to understand you or something.
2:12
Sooner or later, when people see that you are not, that it's not just a whim, that it's not just some sort of a momentary inspiration, but you are sticking to it, just start to respect it.
And if they don't, then yeah, you draw a line and and you tell them.
2:27
And you could have a normal conversation without getting angry about it.
But either way, you should not be compromising your precepts on account of it.
And you certainly should not feel like it's your duty now to change everybody's mind and get everybody to accept you or something, because that's not going to happen.
2:43
Even if everybody does what everybody thinks they should be doing, people will still find ways of disagreeing with you.
And so.
On and I was just thinking that's actually quite common that people you keep the precepts, your family don't keep the precepts and there might not be any arguments, but there's definitely there can be a leaving each other separation eventually happens and that's.
3:17
Just, I mean, separation happens even when neither party keeps the precepts.
So this is just like one of the reasons that yeah, so it's, it's either way, it's not end of the world really.
It's especially because this is actually beneficial as opposed to million of other worldly things you could be doing that would bring you and your family to grow apart.
3:40
This is actually beneficial for you and your family, diminishing greed, diversion and delusion.
I think lots of people feel that pressure, isn't it?
It's like if my parents aren't happy with what I'm doing, I'm doing something wrong as I come.
4:00
Yeah, yeah.
Because of the the pressure that they feel, they think, well, they they can't, the mind is still not mature enough to accept that feeling of discomfort as part of the deal until the mind grows out of it.
4:16
So by having that feeling of discomfort, they confused that, oh, I must be doing something wrong because otherwise why do I feel bad?
Well, you feel bad because you're in the environment that contradicts your new mode of behavior, that contradicts your old mode of behavior, your own mode of behavior.
4:36
Even if nobody's against you, when you start keeping the presets, you're going to feel the pressure more.
You're going to feel anxiety, lack of confidence, all of those things because your sense of confidence in being sure yourself was based on worldly things, on things they were rooted in greed, aversion, delusion, and now you're diminishing that.
4:57
So a sense of self is kind of fading and and it's not going to be felt pleasantly.
So the point is to then realize that feeling unpleasant does not necessarily mean you're doing something wrong.
It could mean that, but obviously that's when you reflect upon the whole situation and you see, hold on, I'm not doing anything wrong.
5:14
Yes, I feel bad.
Why do I feel bad?
Well, because the bad feeling has a reason.
On account of keeping the precepts, mine is not in my control.
In that fundamental sense.
It will feel whatever feeling comes.
And mine is to not lose my my job.
My duty is to not lose perspective regarding that.
5:32
Perspective in.
Like in what what you should continue to be doing, which is keep the precepts and not giving to the pressure of your feeling.
And if people are not clear on that level, that's when they they give in.
Like, no amount of peers can pressure you unless you're already pressuring yourself, unless you're already giving in to that pressure, unless you're uncertain whether you can give in or not.
5:58
But if you know that you wouldn't be breaking the precepts, no, no amount of your friends or family can make you do so.
If you know what is wholesome and what is not, hope.
Eventually you get to obviously understand on a deeper level, wholesome is wholesome, unwholesome is unwholesome.
6:13
But initially it would just come out of reasoning.
But even such as such, it's it's a valid, valid position to take.
It is unwholesome, it is distracting, it is detrimental, unbeneficial.
I won't do it and I'll stick to it.
And now other people might tease you or not see you in the same way.
6:34
Well, that's part of the deal.
But what are you taking as your guide?
Your your parents?
Or the Dumber you know that that perspective of this is wholesome, this is unwholesome.
Well, what they're taking is their guide is their feeling.
Yeah, If they give in to the pressure, it's it's their acting out of their feeling because they don't want to bear it.
6:53
So they compromise their perspective.