0:00
From the Engutu Nikaya suitor called Walking, Walking walking and it just says if essential thoughts were thought of, ill will or cruelty arises while walking and if you tolerate it and do not abandon it, then you are devoid of effort and moral shame.
0:23
Constantly lazy and lacking energy while walking and goes on whether walking, standing, sitting or lying down.
One who thinks bad thoughts connected with household life has entered upon the wrong path, infatuated by delusive things, such a person cannot be free.
0:49
The one who has his thoughts calm and delights instilling of thought.
Such a person can be free.
See, there's a lot of walking meditation out there people out to do, but it's they focus on the the feeling of their feet on the sand.
1:11
It's quite common.
And that's, you know, walk from this point to that point.
How many steps?
30 steps?
Same for anybody where they're sitting.
Well, when the Wheeler says he's upon the wrong path means he's going down the wrong direction.
That's what it means in a more, in a more most accurate manner.
1:28
So going down the wrong path, it's basically attending to things wrongly and means going down the wrong direction of your of your efforts.
So even the ones who are making the efforts.
And that's exactly the example you gave when, when you're doing walking meditation mostly today, people again, they're after you're after the experience of peace or some, some sort of some sort of factual, well, you're after experience of peace or some sort of experience or some novelty or, or, or or or the other.
2:03
But not many people would use the meditation to reflect upon the nature of the thoughts.
Yet that's all they should just talk about as anything that really matters is to not entertain the young wholesome and to cultivate the wholesome, whether you're sitting, walking, lying down or standing, whether you're talking, whether you're lonely with people.
2:28
But yes, unfortunately today you get this like a like a mass group, retreat centres and so on.
And then you get taught like walk meditation, you observe the soles of your feet and you try to like be be as present as possible and catch the moment and so on.
2:45
All that is nothing other than just a focusing practice on a particular aspect of your body, on a particular basically type of perception of touch.
That's it.
And it can be so it can, it can produce a release for people because most of the most of the rest of the rest of the time they spend, they spend their their their day in an unmindful state, very busy, very engaged.
3:07
And then just focusing on one particular thing and refusing to give attention to everything else seems like a way to go.
Because it provides you with a degree of peace.
But that peace is only relative to your lifestyle beforehand.
That peace is not the measure of your understanding and wisdom that comes if you do the demo correctly.
3:24
And it's, it's not hard thing to, to see that.
Just see when you, when you're out of the retreat, how much of your composure you can keep when you go back to your daily life, to to your other things, dealing with things, whether you'll still be able to, to, to remain impenetrable to the unwholesome states as you're walking, sitting, lying down or standing.
3:46
And most people want.
That's why they're going back for retreats, prolonging retreats, the longer retreats, more intense retreats, all that.
But then they say if I focus on my feet walking on the sand right, then I don't think any sensual.
4:01
Thoughts.
Well, that's that's the thing.
That's the thing.
The where you focus is not the root of the problem.
The root of the problem is not understanding the nature of unwholesome and because of that, being subject to it, because you don't know how even unwittingly, you entertain it, you fuel it, you feed it, which means you end up acting out of it.
4:26
So think of unwholesome thoughts at a problem.
Then proliferating unwholesome thoughts are a further problem.
So what happens when people do the focus in practice?
They would focus on one particular thing and refuse to give attention to everything else, including the problem, the problem of unwholesome.
4:44
So then they can feel like, yeah, this is really working.
And I mean, I'm not saying there's absolutely like no benefit whatsoever, but I'm saying that benefit is only relative for those who are, who are, who are distracted most of the other time distracted with duty, with family, with sensuality or or just with your views in some cases.
5:04
So the point is to recognize that like, yeah, not giving attention to the problem can help you, but that's not solving the problem.
That's just managing it, dealing with it temporarily.
And that's exactly the point.
You can practice and further this type of focusing meditation only in such retreat settings.
5:21
You can't sustain that out in the world or you can't sustain that if you have to climb up and down the mountain every single day for Penta, but for five kilometers in rain or whatever else, you can try, but you're going to burn out very soon as you see many, many, many cases that that well, we both kind of witnessed with the monks who will go in the great seclusion, focus on some sort of technique to do it.
5:43
And then just after a week or two, you can't handle it anymore.
You need, you need something.
You need some reference point because, OK, now you stopped attending.
You're just focusing on one thing, but that's it.
That's, that's a war.
That's a dead end.
So the only benefit you were getting before from your meditation practice wasn't because of what you were focusing on is because of what you were not focusing on, which was the unwholesome.
6:06
You were not focusing on unwholesome.
That was the piece you were getting.
Now you arrived and not focusing on a wholesome because you're focusing on something else, which sooner or later environment will prevent you to do so or you're just going to run out of the of the most obvious inspiration to do so.
6:22
And then what you're going to do, you just back in the same and wholesome which remain intact because you you haven't been understanding it, discerning it, resolving it.
You've been ignoring it through watching the soles of your feet, through watching the tip of your nose and so on.
6:38
So that's what I mean.
Nobody denies that people can experience peaceful feelings when they do focusing meditation.
But the point here is that won't result in uprooting the problem.
It's only covering it up.
You can only approve the problem if you if you have, if you start looking at it for what it is directly.
6:57
And that's exactly where the quote, but the part of the suit that you read this talks about.
So that's where you recognize the work is not about me doing walking meditation for 8 hours a day or or focusing on my nostrils all the time.
The work is recognizing whether the mind is affected by ill will, affected by greed, affected by delusion, affected by unwholesome states, and then not entertaining.
7:19
That doesn't matter whether I'm walking, sitting, lying down, or standing.
OK, what posture?
Yeah, the posture is your reference point that you don't need to interfere with if you know where the problem is.
And the problem is mind affected by unwholesome.
7:36
So indeed, sometimes when it's just too much to deal with, yeah, just ignore it.
Just don't pay any attention to it until it calms down so that you can go back to it and deal with it.
But adopting a practice of just constantly not looking at the problem and focusing on something else as a way of release from the problem, it's not going to resolve anything because there's absolutely no discernment there, no wisdom, no understanding, because you're not looking at it.
8:04
Distraction.
It's a form of distraction.
That's why that's very good.
I did say when he gave it similarly says not being free, not being free from sensuality is summoned as in Brahmins.
They premeditate, miss meditate over meditate under meditate, but they don't meditate and it gives a simile says they are like like an owl hunting for a mouse or a cat waiting to pounce on a fish or or or or or similar basically similars of praying upon something or focusing on one moment where you act, where you catch it, where you grab it.
8:41
And he said that's a that's meditating with sensuality.
That's looking completely down the wrong path.
So, so that's again, just imagine yourself praying upon something you're waiting for.
I don't know, a mouse to come out of this hole.
8:58
You mustn't skip a beat because you might escape you and see whether that's different from when people try to not skip a beat when they're observing the soles of their feet or not skip a beat when they're focusing on the nostrils or the belly movement or whatever.
9:15
You end up cultivating the same attitude of praying upon something.
Praying upon something that you clearly think has value is going to resolve all your problems.
Catching this mouse will fix all my problems.
Catching these perfect moments that come and go in front of me would purify my mind.
9:32
But that's a completely he said people who meditate like that meditate with sensuality.
That's why the pre meditate miss meditate over meditate, under meditate and so on.
But they don't meditate.
So as you're walking, a thought of cruelty arises and you don't tolerate it.
9:51
Which means yes.
Which means you don't like thought of cruelty arises means there's your work there for you in its entirety.
Thought of cruelty, that's the problem, nothing else.
So you don't, you don't stop everything you'll be doing.
10:06
You don't you like, just give it all up because I will never, I don't want ever to have such thoughts again.
You can't do that because, well, it's not up to you.
Those thoughts will be presented themselves.
So in order for for you to not be victim of those presentations of ill will or sensuality, you need to understand how you engage with it.
10:27
And you won't understand the habits of your engagement with those thoughts while they're simultaneously present there.
If your sole response to that is look away, it's just look away.
Just ignore it.
Just just consider my breath.
Consider my breath.
Stop thinking about it.
10:42
Stop thinking about it.
And on top of that, you're going to wind yourself up much more because thinking that you must stop thinking is another thought that you're thinking in order to not think.
So that's why it becomes so intense and sort of unpleasant.
10:59
As soon as you haven't thought of said protein, you you.
Recognize you recognize the thought of cruelty, but then it.
Stops.
In a way, that's enough.
Very often, sometimes your recognition might not be clear enough.
So then you need to endure it.
You have to recognize whereby how much of the thought arises on its own.
11:18
And then you have to recognize where the where the line is, where if you cross, then it's you doing it, you entertaining it, you getting involved with it, you trying to get rid of it.
All of those are ways of fueling the thought, including you actively trying to ignore it.
11:37
Why would like there is a thought in mind, I must focus on my sores of my feet.
Why?
Because you're trying to avoid the recent thought in your mind that you think you must not have, and by trying to avoid things that are disagreeable to you, What are you doing?
11:54
You're doing exactly the thing you shouldn't be doing, acting out of craving in regard to how you're feeling.
There is the unpleasant feeling.
Get rid of it, get rid of it, get rid of it.
There is the pleasant feeling, I must have it longer.
I must have it longer.
There's.
A recognition that this is a true thought.
12:11
Exactly.
That's not your doing.
The cruel thought presented itself.
It's a cruel thought.
Yeah.
It's.
Not mine, this is.
It it's like somebody comes right here in front of your door and this is a public space.
Yeah, your cut is yours.
They can't come in, but I have every right to stand in front of the country.
12:28
But if you feel affected by that, that's on you.
So if you come out of your kuti and start to chase them, well, now you actually went into something that's not your domain, not your ownership, and trying to control it, which means you left Kuti unattended.
And then other things can come in because you're everywhere in nowhere and the same, in the same manner, the thing cannot come in whatever thought is, unless you invited in, unless you drag it in.
12:55
And that's what happens with sensuality, either sensuality as in like agreeable desire or disagreeable.
Something you want to get rid of, it just comes in front of you.
But if it's agreeable, you are the one who brings it in.
If it's disagreeable, you know who goes out and tries to chase it.
13:12
Either way, you overstepped your boundary and because of that you're subjected to it and that's why you're affected by it.
So that's what there's that another suit, the way the Buddha did say, but he was still unenlightened bodhisattva when he was in the it's called fear and dread.
13:32
But he said he'd be staying in this, in this frightening forests and grows with wild animals.
And then he would be doing walking meditation at night.
And he said if there is a, if he would hear some sound or something or have a frightening thought, he wouldn't change what he was doing, which is walking.
13:53
He wouldn't stop walking.
Sorry.
He wouldn't stop walking until he dispels that unwholesome state of mind, and then he might change the posture in the same manner whether he was seated, standing, sitting, or lying down.
He wouldn't change the posture before unless he first removed the unwholesome state that arisen.
14:16
And you remove the unwholesome state by not acting out of it, by not trying to get rid of it, by not trying to prolong it.
And that's exactly what it means.
I wouldn't change the posture until this state is dispelled.
Because if if the unwholesome state came up and now he stopped walking and done something else means he acted out of it.
14:38
And that's already a way of fuelling it.
Whether you acted out of it in the forms of trying to prolong it, as in unwholesome state of sensuality, or trying to to to deny it, get rid of it as quickly as possible, as in a wholesome state of ill will or fear or anything disagreeable.
14:57
So the point is you recognize and then how much of it arises on its own and then you don't either add to it or take away from it.
And when it subsides then you change the posture.
So if you do that long enough.
15:14
If you do that long enough, any, no matter how subtle ways of fueling the unwholesome states of your mind you've been entertaining, they will all fade because you, you're just, you're uprooting it left and right, bit by bit by bit.
I mean, you can approach things, but it takes time for them to sort of wither and die.
15:34
But one thing for sure, they'll never wither and die and you certainly never approve to them.
If you keep looking elsewhere, if you keep focusing on the nostrils for the sake of avoiding the thought and not having to think about anything and not having to experience this pleasure.
If you keep focusing on the soles of your feet because you're trying to catch a perfect moment and develop this ultimate peace, they will never be disturbed.
15:57
The the non disturbance doesn't come from not experiencing disturbing things.
Non disturbance comes from not being disturbed by the disturbing things.
So for as long as you're concerned with the disturbing things, not with your response in regard to disturbing things, you're looking in the wrong direction.
16:16
You are down the wrong path.
Destruction being distracting.
Some work to study meditation techniques, playing games.
16:32
Something to do.
Basically, you're focused on doing things.
You're staring at things, perceiving things and observing things, but not looking your attitude behind that, the intentionality behind the motivation behind the craving behind craving is always behind.
16:49
It's always in regard to.
So if you never look in that direction of that background, you're never going to see it because.
Again, this this idea is that by being in a particular posture, cross leg, Lotus position, back straight spine erect, loose and loose belly, all this all these posturings that doesn't do the work for you, But that is it's a game that you play too stretchy.
17:18
It's a little ritual, little motion, motions you go through to create the significance of what you're about to do.
Because if you just sit down, stare at the wall or look down the hill and contemplate, why do you suffer when there is a, when you can't fulfill your desires?
17:34
But why do you suffer when you experience something disagreeable?
Why do you suffer when you pair with things you don't want?
Why do you suffer when you're separate from things you want?
Yeah, there's not much to it that you can perform.
And it's, it's for many people, it's it's almost just abstract.
17:50
So they need something more palpable, which is on a on a level of of of of sort of mechanical performance doing things with your body particular portion, particular way of walking.
I must be stepping on the outsides of my souls of whatever I can be walking like this.
I must walk slowly.
I can't walk fast.
18:06
All of that is being concerned with a particular with a particular content on your perception, failing to see the nature behind it, and certainly failing to to to recognize the enduring feeling in regard to it.
Yes, athletic, athletic meditation here.
18:24
How how long do you sit?
Sure, two hours out.
Some guys can.
Sit.
For two weeks.
Well, it's all based, as I said, it's all it always was around trying to perceive, trying to catch, praying upon something.
And that's why you would have to go through these specialized motions because if you walk too fast, you can't be catching something.
18:42
So you must walk slowly, slow down, stand, stand and just look at it.
Just just just grab it as it comes out, recognize it and that's it.
And that's nothing else than meditating with that same sensuality that you're trying to overcome.
So.
If there's no no unwholesome thoughts.