0:02
So there's a question about the 8 precepts, but in particularly the precept against entertainment, playing games, watching movies, just distraction, I suppose, distracting yourself.
0:20
And why?
Why is that an issue?
You know, simple game, kind of just you're feeling under pressure, you're keeping the precepts and you just want to relax.
0:36
Yeah.
So it's an issue because you're not free from suffering yet.
That's why it's an issue.
If you were to be free from suffering, then yes, there are those things that could be deemed neutral in a in a in and of themselves, like, oh, it's just, and that's what people would often like trying to reason kind of divorced from their situation and look at it from its own.
1:03
It's like, well, it's not a big deal.
And yeah, factually it's not a big deal.
But paired with your non freedom from suffering, those things would then result in greed, aversion, delusion that you're not free from in festering, increasing.
1:20
If you were free from those things, then yes, those neutral activities, even entertainment would not, will not 'cause that because you would have removed it, you would have, you would have basically removed the unwholesome roots that are still present in you.
1:39
So that's why you need to renounce those activities as well.
Until you're free from suffering, until you have uprooted the cause of all problems, so to speak, then yeah, if, if you choose to whatever, for whatever reason, engage with something that might be deemed entertainment externally, well, it won't be an entertainment for you because the nature of entertainment is the nature of distraction, distraction from the present situation that is bothering, that is oppressing that you are not free from internally.
2:16
But yeah, if you just judge it by the external activity on paper, it's always nothing to it because there isn't anything to it.
But why is it being done?
What is your intention behind it?
Then you realize, Oh yeah, there's a whole world of difference.
It's, it seems to me, well, it is you feeling displeasure, you feeling boredom, and you want to.
2:40
Get rid of it has to be exactly because because those are things for as long as you're not free from suffering means those things are still be going to be pressuring you.
I don't know, think about like you just I don't put a blanket over a grass and it's just a blanket on the grass.
What's the problem with it?
Well, what's underneath the blanket?
2:57
And it's like these, these weeds and roots, they will now grow even more.
But if you remove it, expose it to the sun, they'll dry up and die.
Then put all blankets you want on the ground, but not before you would have got rid of the stuff that needs to be needs to be dealt with.
3:15
Again, why would you?
As you said, why would you?
What's the reason for distracting?
Why would be the reason for example watching a movie?
Sometimes it can even be just a habit for people, even if it's not necessarily like fully defined pressure to to distract myself.
3:30
It's just careless habit.
Just not even think about it.
In general, it's like an escape.
It is an escape, yeah, but again, like even an escape in and of itself, it's not a problem if there is nothing you're trying to escape, but you won't be in a position to be not trying to escape anything.
3:54
I freed if you would not have stopped all those activities beforehand.
Because as I said, for as long as greed, diversion of the illusion are still there underlying your experience, those escapes would serve to to to would provide food for those, for those unwholesome roots, would feed them.
4:12
That's why they are unwholesome.
But if say Arhant has uprooted all these things from his from his experience as a whole, then entertainment there is nothing to feed.
So and then exactly how much would then he enjoy it?
4:28
Well that's a question of individual person I suppose.
But because the reason for enjoyment is usually exactly that self forgetfulness and and disappearance from the current state of your of your kind of emotional state.
4:44
Feeling pressure, boredom, all these things that could be there simply had taking a break from yourself.
Basically, that's what it translates to.
That whole entertainment industry is like one of the biggest industries, you know, because that's because everybody, everyone's suffering.
5:04
And it's like that.
It's just such an easy way to to go to, to escape your reality.
It's built on your suffering.
Basically.
It's like you.
Yeah, because like if you, if you and you realize how much people would be dependent on it, because if you were to just stop, for example, entertainment, the pressure would increase.
5:27
That's it.
Like, if you're not for as long as you're not stopping it, it might not seem like a big deal.
But then if you choose to stop it just as an experiment, then you realize, oh, so I just have to spend the entire day without forgetting about myself through these activities.
5:45
And you just, oh, that's the unpleasant part, just being with yourself.
Because why is it, as I, as I ask often, why is it just sitting with yourself doing nothing?
Why is that unpleasant?
Why is that kind of something that people will be resisting by default?
6:05
No, just doing nothing, not distracting myself, no trying to, you know, get rid of anything they're trying to.
And yet it's like it's the worst thing.
You ask yourself these things and you realize, Oh yeah, it's not even unpleasant.
6:20
Like, it's not even like that you that you really hate or something.
Just like by default, you want to look away from yourself.
By default you want to be taken elsewhere.
And that's a habit that then festers and proliferates and you become more and more dependent on that.
6:42
And as any other habit, you can undo it by not providing fuel for it.
So by reducing the distraction and entertainment and and giving it up, you are bringing yourself back to yourself in a sense of like, OK, so now I'm with myself and I don't need to make some extra crazy determined effort to be present in the moment with myself.
7:04
All I need to do is not distract myself from myself and I am present in the moment with myself.
So mindfulness and awareness will be there because you're not basically hindering it with all these habitual actions of towards entertainment and delusion and distraction.